ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
ANdAmAN & NICoBAR IsLANds
Field crops
Pulses
Seed hardening of green gram or black gram seeds for dry land
ecosystem with 100 ppm MnSO for 3 h at the ratio of 1:0.3 ratio
4
and dry back to original seed moisture content (8 - 9 %) under
shade.
Rice fallow pulse as relay cropping broadcast 20 kg of green gram
or black gram seeds in the standing crop 5 to 10 days before the
harvest of the paddy crop uniformly under optimum soil moisture
conditions so that the seeds should get embedded in the waxy mire.
Rice fallow crops, foliar spray of DAP 20g/litre or urea 20g/litre or
pulse wonder 5 kg/ha once at flowering and second spray 15 days
after first spray for enhanced seed set.
Maize
Quality maize seeds shall be used the seed rate of 20 kg/ha and
sown the seeds with spacing of 60 cm x 25 cm and dibble the seeds
at a depth of 4 cm with single seed per hill if the germination is
assured otherwise put two seeds per hill.
Maize is more sensitive to moisture stress and excessive moisture,
so that need based irrigation should be given time and ensure
availability of optimum moisture during the critical growth stage
of 45 to 65 days after sowing. Because of moisture stress during
critical stage will be reduced yield considerably.
Groundnut
In Island condition, best season for groundnut sowing is IInd
fortnight of December to IInd fortnight of January. Seed rate of
120 kg per ha of kernels for normal kernel size, whereas, in bold
seeded variety 175 kg/ha of kernels shall be used.
224
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Groundnut seeds treat with 125 ml of Rhizobium and 125 ml of
Phosphobacteria per ha and shade dry it for 30 minutes before
sowing.
Foliar application of combined nutrient solution (DAP 2.5 kg,
Ammonium sulphate 1 kg and borax 0.5 kg) spray on 25th and
35th days after sowing. It will be improved the pod fillings in bold
seed groundnut.
Livestock
Livestock should be properly dewormed after rainy season for
internal parasites and dipped for external parasites in consultation
with veterinary doctors or state veterinary deptt. or KVKs.
Vaccination schedule should be followed for preventing diseases of
livestock as per the recommendation of sate Veterinary Department
e.g., vaccination for swine fever in pigs, vaccination for FMD for
livestock etc.
For protecting the livestock from extreme stress due to hot and
humid condition, proper housing with ventilation should be
provided.
Strict Bio-security procedures should be followed at livestock
farms. Foot bath should be provided at entrance of the farm with
phenyl, Dettol, Savlon etc. The
The area surrounding the livestock shed should be cleaned and
disinfected by spraying Hypochloride solutions, phenol solutions
or dusting with lime.
Clean palatable water should be provided ad.lib.
Balanced feeding of livestock should be practiced. If possible
low-cost feed should be formulated from locally available feed
ingredients viz. Broken rice, rice bran, coconut cake, Chunni
(pulse), Till Cake, Azolla etc.
The Livestock feed should be properly stored in a dry and cool
place to prevent the dampening and moulding of the feed.
225
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Artificial heat should be provided to newborn piglets to avoid early
piglet mortality during winter.
The farmers should sow fodder seeds or cuttings in their field for
ensuring nutritious fodder availability year around viz. Paragrass,
Guinea grass, Hybrid napier, Sorghum.
The excess fodder should be harvested which may be converted
into haylage or silage for future use during dry spell.
Supplementation of Mineral mixture (@ 50g cattle, 25g goats and
pigs) should be provided for better productivity and reproductive
performance in livestock.
Avoid herding or farming of different species in the same premises.
Clean milk production practice should be followed during
milking, storing, transporting and marketing in order to prevent
contamination of milk with dust and microbes.
Always wear mask, use sanitizer, or wash hands using soaps and
maintain social distancing in the farms and marketplaces.
Poultry
Poultry should be properly dewormed for internal parasites
and dipped / dusted for external parasites in consultation with
veterinary doctors or state veterinary deptt. or KVKs.
Vaccination schedule should be followed for preventing diseases of
poultry as per the recommendation of sate Veterinary Department
e.g., vaccination for Ranikhet, IBD, Marek’s etc. disease for poultry.
For protecting the poultry from extreme stress condition, proper
housing with ventilation should be provided. Avoid bright bulbs in
poultry shed for lighting.
The deep litters should be frequently turned and mixed with limes
to prevent dampening and cake formation leading fungal growth.
Strict Bio-security procedures should be followed at poultry farms.
Foot bath should be provided at entrance of the farm with phenyl,
Dettol, Savlon etc.
226
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The area surrounding the poultry should be cleaned and disinfected
by spraying Hypochloride solutions, phenol solutions or dusting
with lime.
Empty poultry shed should be cleaned and fumigated with formalin
and potassium per-magnate or may be sprayed with 10% formalin
solution for disinfection.
Balanced feeding of poultry should be practiced. If possible low-cost
feed should be formulated from locally available feed ingredients
viz. Broken rice, rice bran, coconut cake, Chunni (pulse), Till Cake,
Fishmeal, Azolla, Shell grits etc.
The poultry feed should be properly stored in a dry and cool place
to prevent the dampening and moulding of the feed.
Artificial brooding should be provided to the chicks upto 4-6 weeks
for healthy growth and to reduce mortality.
Clean palatable water should be provided ad.lib.
Electrolyte should be provided for combating heat-stress.
Avoid herding or farming of different species in the same premises.
Always wear mask, use sanitizer, or wash hands using soaps and
maintain social distancing in the farms and marketplaces.
Fisheries
Provide sufficient comfortable zone to fish below the surface layer,
which gets heated up beyond optimum temperature range (28-
32oC) during summers, by maintaining 5-6 feet water depth.
Provision of partial shading of the pond with no- deciduous trees
or other means mitigate the impact of high temperature.
Oxygen levels may fall to lethal levels, especially during dawn,
due to enhanced biological activity in the pond. Hence, aerating
the ponds during early hours of the day before sunrise, either by
adding fresh water or by aerators.
Optimum oxygen level (≥ 5 mg/l or ppm) will keep the fish healthy
and increase its food converting efficiency, leading to fast growth
227
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
and higher productivity. If the fish come on the surface to gasp
atmospheric air, provide aeration, and also suspend manuring and
feeding of fish. Partial water exchange improves water quality.
The diurnal variation in water pH should be checked, which may
fluctuate beyond recommended range of 7.5 to 9 due to excessive
growth of algal blooms in the pond.
Manuring /fertilization of pond shall be suspended in case water
turns dark green, dark brown or greenish brown in color and a
green, brown, or sometimes red colored algal mat appears on the
water surface.
Regular bottom racking with the help of barbed wire is
recommended to prevent the accumulation of toxic gases like
ammonia and carbon dioxide. Toxicity of ammonia in fishponds
increases with increase in temperature and pH, which can be
reduced by keeping the ponds well aerated and adding a dose of
gypsum/alum as per expert advice.
It is also very important to sustain regular plankton (natural fish
food) production in the pond and provide a nutritionally balanced
supplementary diet. Keep the pond rich in plankton through mixed
utilization of organic manures and inorganic fertilizers.
Farmers are advised to use fully decomposed organic manures
(FYM, biogas slurry, vermicompost or poultry manure) as per
recommended rates and feed the fish daily with good quality feed
having 25% crude protein @ 1.5-2.0 % of the fish body weight after
sunrise (between 9-11 a.m.), preferably by bag feeding.
Suspend feeding in case fish come to the surface for gasping
atmospheric air or disease is observed in the fish.
Increased input in terms of seed, feed and fertilizer should be
avoided. It not only enhances input costs, but also deteriorates the
water quality elevating the risk of stock loss.
Follow recommended prophylactic measures (liming, potassium
permanganate application).
228
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
In case of disease occurrence, consult an expert from KVKs, ICAR-
CIARI, Port Blair or Dept, of Fisheries.
Always wear mask, use sanitizer or wash hands using soaps and
maintain social distancing in the farms and marketplaces.
Horticulture
Brinjal
Select the high yield round fruited varieties as per local market
demand.
Integrated Pest management practices should have followed for
control of fruit and shoot borer.
Bacterial wilt resistance brinjal like CARI brinjal-1, & 2 and other
local private company varieties
Tomato
Lime applications @ 100kg/acre before transplanting of seedlings
Grow only wilt resistance varieties like Arka Rashak Laxmi, Utkal
Raja, Utkal Urbasi etc.
Avoid the rainy days for transplanting of seedlings.
Select the sandy soils for better crop growth and yield.
Cole crops (Cabbage Cauliflowers)
Grow only tropical high temperature tolerant varieties like white
marvel, white short etc.
Avoid the excess rainy period for transplanting of seedlings.
Seedlings should treat with bio fertilizers and bio-inoculants.
Soil application of biofertlizers before transplanting
Apply micronutrients like boron, zinc, calcium and molybdenum.
Don’t apply excess chemical fertilizers like DAP and Urea.
Drain excess water from field and grown in raised bed during
uncertain rain in winter.
229
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
French beans
Always grow pole types of French beans.
Yellow vein mosaic and aphids should control timely to minimize
the crop loss.
Root crops (Radish, sweet potato, Carrot)
Always choose sandy loam loose soil for root crops
Pusachetaki, Japanese long of Radish variety should planned for
cultivation.
Improved Bio fortified varieties of sweet potato like Bhu-sona and
Bhu-sakti and CARI SP-1 and CARI SP-2 should select.
The Asiatic variety of carrot like Pusa Rudhira and others should
select for cultivation.
Soil application of neem manures and trichoderma powder will be
beneficial for soil borne disease.
Chilies
Grow leaf curling resistance varieties like VNR-Black, bullet mirch,
Pusajwala, MDU-1 etc.
Control of viral disease minimize the white fly population by
spraying of imdachlorophid 1ml/liter water and then spraying of
0.05% of Dimethoate (Rogor), soil application of neem manure or
carbofuran @1.5kg/ha is advisable.
Spray of NAA at 50 ppm at full bloom stage for control of excess
flower drop.
Seed treatment with Thiram or Captan @2gm/kg for control
Anthracnose in fruit and spray of Benomyle @0.1%
Cucurbit vegetables
Cucurbits like pumpkin, ridgeguard, cucumber and bitter gourd
are highly sensitive for downy mildew disease due to hot humid
condition. Control of this disease by spraying of cupperoxichloride
(Blitox)or Mancozeb during early stage of infection.
230
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Powdery mildew in several cucurbits’ vegetables noticed and it
should be managed by spraying of Dinocap (karathane 0.03%) and
dusting of sulphur dust.
Leaf mosaic viruses in some cucurbits like bitter gourd are
frequently notice during Rabi season, control of insect vector.
Anthracnose also reported in some fruits of cucurbit vegetables,
repeat spraying of mancozeb or Zeneb (Dithane-Z-78)
Fruit fly and red pumkin beetle are more serious pest damaged the
fruits and leafs of maximum
Watermelon
Follow the control measure of fusarium wilt due to uncertain rain
in field, remove excess water logging condition.
Application of TIBA 25ppm, MH 50ppm +GA 25ppm, boron and
calcium @20ppm will be beneficial for more fruiting and fruit
cracking.
Okra
Grow YMV resistance variety and spray of Dimethoate (Rogor) at
interval of 10days
Powdery mildew noticed sometimes controlled as per previous
crop
Spotted bollworm-infected fruit removed and soil application of
carbaryl or neem manures.
Coconut
Prepare vermicomposting from coconut waste like leafs, flower
sheath etc.
Fallow clean cultivation in coconut orchard
If required watering should be followed by basin making in coconut
trees.
Mulching practices should fallow with coconut leaf, husk or other
organic materials.
231
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Arecanut
Fallow the clean cultivation and mulching of arecanut orchard
should with arecanut residue.
Apply neem manure to avoid root diseases
Banana
If rhizome weevil notices in planation, arrange proper drainage
in field.
Remove all affected rhizomes from field and apply chloropyriphos
dust.
Mangoes
Infection of mango fruit fly noticed in late March-April-May,
control these insects with install of sex pheromones. Spray of
Dimethoate 0.045% + molasses 0.1%
Dip mature unripe fruits dip in sodium chloride solution (5%) in
water for one hour.
Shooty mold fungus appears in shade area or inner area of middle
Andaman, spray of good fungicide two times before maturity.
Guava
Install sex pheromone trap for control of fruit fly.
Apply tricoderma powder in root zone of guava for control of
fusarium wilt.
Citrus fruits (Oranges, lime, lemons, Pomaleo)
Apply proper nutrition after harvesting and don’t leave the fruits
for ripening at trees.
Regular application of tricoderma powder for control of wilt and
dieback in citrus fruits.
Marigold
Grow round year marigold varieties like Bidhan Marigold-2 and
other African marigold flowers for commercial cultivation.
232
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-vI
AssAm
Field crops
Transplanted early Ahu Rice
Field selection: Areas with assured irrigation facilities should be
selected. Heavy to medium textured soils are preferred.
Nursery management: Seeds are to be put in plain water, stirred
well and floated ones are to be discarded. Seeds should be sown
in nursery bed during mid-February. Land is to be thoroughly
puddled and seed beds of 1.25 m breadth and 10 m length (may be
increased or decreased as per the requirement) are prepared with
30 cm gap in between beds. In each seed bed 20-30 kg cow dung
or compost, 80 g urea, 80 g SSP and 40 g MOP are to be applied.
Well germinated seeds are sown @ 650 to 1000 g per bed. Seed
requirement for transplanting one hectare of main field is 40-45 kg.
In case of hybrid varieties, seed are to be sown @ 250 -300 g/bed
and seed requirement for transplanting 1 ha area is 7.5 kg.
Transplanting is to be done by putting 2-3 seedlings per hill at a
depth of 4-5 cm in semi dwarf varieties and 1 seedling per hill for
hybrid. The spacing is 20 cm x 15 cm. Recommended fertilizer
dose is 40 kg N, 20 kg P O and 20 kg K O per hectare in case of
2 5 2
semi dwarf varieties. Only one third of the total urea, full doses of
super phosphate and potash are to be applied at the time of final
puddling. The 2nd one third and 3rd one third doses of urea are to
be applied at tillering and panicle initiation stages respectively. Top
dressing of urea should be preceded by weeding. In case of hybrid
varieties, recommended fertilizer doses are 100 kg N, 60 kg P O
2 5
and 60 kg K O per hectare and urea fertilizer is to be applied in 4
2
equal splits i.e., at the time of final puddling, at maximum tillering,
at panicle initiation and at booting stage.
233