ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
ARUNACHAL PRAdesH
Field crops
Rabi Maize
Sowing of rabi maize at lower elevated areas should be done in
September and completed preferably by mid-October and not
delayed further as it may reduce the yield.
High yielding hybrids (F1 hybrids) like HQPM-1, C-1415, PAC-
705 etc and composite varieties like Vijay, VL Makka-88, etc are
recommended for rabi season.
Seed treatment with Bavistin + Captan in 1:1 ratio @ 2g/kg seed is
recommended at a spacing of 60cm row to row and 20 cm plant to
plant.
FYM @10 q/ha along with seed treatment with Azotobacter and
PSB are also recommended for organic rabi maize.
Intercropping of rabi maize with winter vegetables like cole crops,
carrot, pea, potato, local beans etc may be practiced for increasing
productivity.
Two weeding at 30 -60 DAS are recommended to avoid any kind of
water and nutrient stress for maize in rabi season.
Cobs should be harvested when moisture is not more than 20%
in grains. Harvested cobs should be sun dried properly before
shelling.
For control of the Fall Army worm in rabi maize, Seed treatment
with Cyantraniliprole 19.8% + Thiomethoxam 19.8% @ 4 ml
kg-1 of seed. At seedling stage spray 5% neem seed kernel extract
(NSKE) or Azadirachtin 1500 ppm @ 5 ml l-1 of water to kill eggs
and neonate larvae may be applied. In mid-whorl stage, spray
Chlorantraniliprole 18.5% SC @ 0.4 ml l-1 or Spinetoram 11.7%
SC @ 0.5 ml l-1 of water. In late whorl stage, spray Emamectin
benzoate 5% SG @ 0.4 ml l-1 or Thiamethoxam 12.6% + lambda
cyhalothrin 9.5% @ 0.25 ml l-1 of water.
246
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Rabi Paddy
Complete harvesting of early and medium duration paddy
varieties within second fortnight of November when 80% of grains
in panicle are mature.
Harvesting should be done on bright sunny days and sundry of
harvested paddy to bring down moisture level at 12%.
If sufficient moisture available in the paddy fields at harvesting
time, farmers may go for relay cropping of pea with paddy crop.
For this purpose, pea seeds may be sown at the base of the standing
hills before 15 days of harvesting.
If sufficient residual moisture is available in paddy field, farmers
should try to sow rapeseed/mustard or any other pulses by
following zero or minimum tillage.
Rapeseed/mustard
In India rapeseed and mustard is grown during winter season. The
crop needs about 18°C - 25°C temperature. The crop prefers low
humidity. There should not be any rainfall especially at the time
of flowering. Rainfall, high humidity and cloudy weather are not
good for the crop during winter as it invites aphids, and the crop
gets spoilt completely. Under Rainfed, conditions as in most areas
of Arunachal Pradesh 1 - 2 pre-flowering rains help in boosting
the grain yield. Excessive cold and frost are harmful to the crop.
Mustard thrives best in medium or heavy loam soils. Heavy soils
subjected to water logging should be avoided, as the crop cannot
tolerate such conditions. Very light soils usually cause a serious
moisture stress. Saline and alkaline soils are often not fit for the
crop though it has good tolerance to such conditions.
Zero tillage or minimum tillage is recommended for sowing
rapeseed/mustard when grown under rainfed condition during
rabi season. Practicing zero tillage helps in utilizing the residual
moisture in the field after kharif paddy besides allowing to sow the
seeds in time it also reduces the cost of cultivation and improves
the soil condition by addition of organic matter over time.
247
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Ploughing of fields for the Toria/Mustard to be completed by first
fortnight of October
Sowing of Toria /Mustard seed to be completed by second fortnight
of October. Timely sowing ensures the optimum crop growth and
less infestation of Mustard aphid.
Seed treatment should be done for rapseed/mustard with
Trichoderma viridae @ 5g/kg of seed.
Suitable variety for Toria is TS-36 & TS-38 recommended for
cultivation under Papum Pare district. They are highly adapted
under agro-climatic condition of Papum Pare.
Sowing of Toria may be extended up to 15th of November in case
of available moisture in the soil.
Intercultural operation like hand weeding to be carried out at 30,
60 and 90 Days after Sowing.
Harvesting of silique to be done at between 120-150 DAS
To control mustard aphid spraying of 5% neem seed kernel extract
(NSKE) or Azadiractin 1500 ppm @ 5ml/litre of water.
Potato
The soil should be friable, porous, and well drained. The optimum
pH range is 4.8 to 5.4. It is a cool weather crop. Potato is mostly
grown as a rainfed crop. It is cultivated in regions receiving a
rainfall of 1200 – 2000 mm per annum.
Ploughing of fields for the Potato to be completed by second
fortnight of October till 15thof November with ridge and furrow
methods of planting.
Select the certified and disease-free seed potato tuber for planting.
Potato tuber may be treated with Azotobacter and Phosphobacteria
each @ 2gm/kg of tuber before planting. The treated tuber may be
shade dry for half an hour and planting to be completed by first
fortnight of November. Timely sowing ensures the optimum crop
growth.
248
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
For planting in one ha of area, 22-25 q/ha tubers require with 2-3
eyes and 25-45 gm weight of each tuber by maintaining planting
distance of 60 x 20 cm.
Suitable variety for Potato is Kufri Pokhraj, Khufri Bahar, Khufri
Alankar, K. Jyoti, K. Kanchan (red-skinned) recommended for
cultivation in Arunachal Pradesh.
First irrigation to be given at 10-12 days or after germination,
second at tuberisation at 25 days after planting, 3rd at initiation of
tuber at 40 DAP and 4th at development of Tuber at 50-70 DAP.
For early blight of potato spraying with mancozeb @ 2.5g/litre of
water at 15 days interval for 3 times.
Intercultural operation like hand weeding to be carried out at 30,
60 and 90 Days after Sowing.
Two earthing up operation may be done at 30-35 DAP and second
at 25-30 DAP of first earthing up followed by light irrigation
Irrigation should be stopped at least 10 days before haulm cutting
and harvesting of Potato to be completed by mid-February on a
sunny day to avoid rotting of tubers due to high temperature.
Dehaulming (removal of foliage and stem portions) should be
done 10-15 days before harvesting which will allow hardening of
tuber skin. This practice is highly recommended for production of
tubers meant to be kept for seed purpose.
Late Blight: For management of dreaded late blight in potato
ensure early sowing (Mid October) of the seeds. When crop is full
grown keep vigilance for weather condition. If cloudy, foggy, or
rainy weather is forecasted then a prophylactic spray Ridomil @
2.5g/liter of water at 15 days interval for 3 times.
Buckwheat
Optimum time of sowing is September-October for high altitude
areas of Tawang, West Kameng and Lower Subansiri districts as
relay crop after maize and October-Mid November for low altitude
areas like Dibang and Lohit valleys.
249
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed rate is 20 kg/ha and spacing of 30 cm between rows is
recommended.
Foxtail millet
Optimum time of sowing is middle of January to middle of
February (the best time is last week of January). Seed rate is 8-10
kg/ha, which may be increased to 15 kg/ha under broadcast sowing.
Spacing should be 25 cm between rows.
Horticultural Crops
Nursery Preparation for winter vegetables
Nursery should be prepared for the crops like Brinjal, Chilli,
Broccoli, cabbage, cauliflower, knolkhol etc.
Site: Nursery area should be well fenced to protect it from pet
and wild animals. The area should be near the water source. The
area should be free from waterlogging. Nursery should be situated
near the main field for transplanting. Nursery area should receive
sunlight right from south-west aspect is most suitable. Proper
drainage must be provided. Raising of seedling require fertile and
healthy soil. The soil should be loam to sandy loam. Soil should have
good organic matter and aerated. Soil texture should be neither too
coarse nor too fine. Soil pH should be of 6 to 7 approx. Soil should
normally be rich in all essential nutrient elements.
Soil Preparation: It needs a deep cultivation of the nursery land
either by soil turning plough or by spade and subsequent 2-3 hoeing
to get a fine tilth. Mix 2 Kg well rotten and farmyard manure\
compost or leaf compost or 500g vermicompost per square meter
and mix in the soil. If the soil is heavy mix2-3 kg sand per square
meter so that the seed emergence may not be hampered.
Soil Treatment: For raising the healthy seedlings, soil must
be treated to make it pathogen and pest free. We can use soil
solarization methods or formalin solution. This should be done 10-
15 days before seed sowing. Prepare formalin solution (1.5 to 2%)
250
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
in one container and drench the soil @ 4-5 litre of water per square
meter soil surface to saturate it up to depth of 15-20cm. Cover the
drench area with polythene sheet. Hot steam can be used to treat
the soil against harmful insect pest. Soil treatment using Captan or
Thiram which kill the soil borne pathogens.
Bed preparation: Beds should be prepared according to the season
and the crop. The breadth of the beds should be not more than
1.00 m. The beds should be 15-20 cm raised from the ground
surface. The standard size of nursery bed is 3m × 1m ×15 cm. A
space between beds should be 30-45 cm. Add 20-25 kg well rotten
farmyard manure in each standard size nursery bed. The number
of nursery beds depends on the crop, season and growing area for
transplanting. The beds should be prepared in the east and west
direction and lines/rows for sowing of seeds should be made from
north to south direction on the beds.
Seed should be treated with Trichoderma spp. @2g/100g and apply
10 - 25 g of Trichoderma spp. powder per 100 m2 of nursery bed or
treat with carbendazim 50% WP @ 2g/1kg seed.
Orange
Keep the plantation clean and remove unwanted branches
continuously.
Regular scouting of the field or horticulture crops is recommended
for disease and pest management.
To control gummosis and collar rot disease of orange apply
Bordeaux paste up to 1meter high in post monsoon.
Harvesting of oranges may be done in 10-15 days interval. Care
should be taken for not damaging the plant or fruits during
harvesting.
During the month of September second dose of Citrus mixture @
1kg per plant should be applied for old plants.
251
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Pea:
For pea cultivation, temperature range should be between 15 to
30 degrees Celsius. Optimum rainfall range is between 400 to 500
mm. While harvesting, the temperature should range between 15
to 20 degree Celsius and sowing temperature should range between
25 to 30 degrees Celsius.
Soil: Well drained loamy soil with optimum pH range of 6-7.5 is
suitable. Thrives best in cool weather. This crop withstands low
temperature at the seedling stage.
Sowing time: For rabi crop planting is done from October to
November.
Seed rate: 50 to 60 kg of seeds is required for a hectare.
Seed treatment: Treat the seeds with Trichoderma 4 g/kg or
Thiram or Captan at 2 g/kg of seed to avoid seed borne diseases.
Treat the seeds with Rhizobium culture at the rate of 2 kg and apply
2 kg Phosphobacterium as soil application just before sowing.
Preparation of field: The field should be deep ploughed and
prepare the land to fine tilth.
Spacing: Sowing of seeds should be done at 45 x 10 cm in line
Irrigation: Pea is an Irrigation responsive crop. So, iirrigation
is done immediately after sowing and another on 3rd day after
sowing. Thereafter irrigation is done once in a week if possible.
In water scarcity area irrigation should be managed at least at
flowering and pod formation stage. During snow fall irrigation is
necessarily given to plants.
Manuring: Apply FYM at 20 t/ha and 60 kg N, 80 kg P and 70
kg K/ha as basal and 60 kg N/ha on 30 days after sowing. While
Rhizobium inoculated, the N fertilizer may be reduced to 50%
Weeding should be done 15 days after sowing. Subsequent weeding
should be done as and when necessary. Stake the plants on 30th
day of sowing.
252
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Plant protection: Pod borer can be managed by Spray of Nuvan at
0.5% concentration thrice at fortnightly intervals for Aphids and
leaf miner malathion 50EC may be applied. For management of
Powdery mildew, spray Wettable sulphur 2.5 g/lit in three rounds
at 15 days interval.
Harvest: First picking can be done on 75 days after sowing for
most varieties. High temperature during harvest affects the quality
of peas.
Plant protection for winter vegetables
For lepidopteron defoliator like diamond black moth, cabbage
butterfly etc. farmers may use BT products and for the soil borne
insects metarhizium products may be used at 7 days intervals for
winter vegetables.
Nursery bed treated with Trichoderma spp. For control of damping
off disease.
Use BT for management of caterpillar management at 7 days
interval.
Use soil solarisation technique for control of soil pest and weed.
Spray Copper oxychloride@300gm + streptomycine @6 gm/150 lit
of water for management of black rot.
To control leaf spot and blight infection spray of Mancozeb @400
gm/ 150 litres of water at 15 days interval
To control Broccoli white mold spray Metalaxyl + Mencozeb@2gm
/ ltr of water @ 10 days interval.
For specific pest and disease incidence farmers need to be vigilant
frequently and consult with the concerned departments and KVK.
Livestock
Poultry:
Provide sufficient bedding materials to keep them warm.
Provide adequate clean drinking water +electrolyte
253
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Vaccination as per the schedule with proper consultation with vet.
Provide anti-coccidial drugs. Make control of coccidiosis in poultry
by treated with coccinil plus vet (Amprolium HCL, Ethopabate,
sulphat quinoxaline & pyrimethamine promix.,B,P, Vet) the dose
rate of 30g dissolved in 50 liters of drinking water for 7 days.
Make sure for deworming of poultry chickens with albendazole
at the dose rate of 20mg/kg orally. 30-40ml/100 birds in drinking
water. Repeat after 21 days.
Remove wet litter/provide artificial heating and light
Piggery:
Provide proper bedding materials for newly born piglets to protect
them from cold
Ensure vaccination of pig against swine fever at the age of 3 months
old pig and repeat annually
Deworm at regular interval.
During scarcity of fodder provide hay/silage/feed blocks.
Cattle
Protect the newborn from cold.
Make sure deworming of calves with albendazole 5mg/kg body
weight repeat deworming once in 3-4 months.
Store freshly cut paddy straw (To use as feed during lean months).
Avoid dampness and keep dry all the cow shed area.
Vaccination as per the schedule with proper consultation with vet.
Goats
Ensure deworming of goats (Albendazole @ 7.5 mg/kg body
weight) especially young kids before the start of rainy season.
Fisheries
Don’t allow runoff water into the pond, it contains dust, microbes,
254
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
sand, derbies, which will pollute the water and cause disease
outbreak.
Sundry the pond bottom and plough thoroughly, then add
limestone powder @ 60 kg/acre to maintain soil PH and release of
gases as pre stocking management.
In heavy rainy area, go for vegetable cultivation on pond dykes to
avoid soil erosion.
Fish farmers need to take some special care of their fishponds
during rainy season to protect their stock from sudden changes
in water quality and prevent physical damages to the pond due to
erosion of dikes.
In case, during rainy season, cloudy condition persists during the
daytime, stop feeding the fish and resume feeding on the next
sunny day.
If EUS (Epizootic Ulcerative Syndrome) disease outbreaks in
monsoon season, then apply CIFAX @ 1 lit. /ha of water body.
Mushroom cultivation
Oyster mushroom may be cultivated in almost all the rice growing
areas in Arunachal Pradesh. It may be started immediately after
harvesting of paddy crop. The required spawns (Mushroom seeds)
may be collected from reliable sources. Proper training is essential
for cultivation of this crop. Interested farmers are suggested to
contact nearest KVK for cultivation of oyster mushroom
Mushroom house is fully clean, dark, ventilated and must be dust
free.
Use fresh paddy straw or paddy husk for mushroom cultivation.
Paddy straw are to be chopped into 3-5 cm pieces and soaked in
fresh water for 8-16 hours in formalin solution or boil them for
at least half an hour. Drain the water completely. It is ready for
bagging. 14 x 22-inch PP polybag may be used. 4 to 5 layers of straw
may be inserted with some spawn placed on each layer towards the
255
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
sides of the bag. Finally, the bag is be tied tightly and make 30-40
holes with a sterilized knife. Keep the bags in mushroom house
hanging one after another. Keep on watering the bags once daily.
After 22 days all the bags will turn whitish and in such condition
the poly bags need to be removed. Keep on watering twice a day
when temperature is above 28oC and when temperature is below
200C spray water once only. Growing mushrooms will be visible
from around 28 – 30 days.
Community Science
Brining of Rabi vegetables from surplus production
Boil the brine by adding 1/4 cup of salt in 1 lit of water and then let
the brine cool.
Wash and prepare the vegetables (cut in same size if necessary).
Blanch the vegetable for 2 min.
Place them in a jar and cover with brine solution
Finish with a capful of refine oil and close the jar.
Leafy vegetables are not suitable for brining.
Pickling of Rabi Vegetables
Wash and cut the vegetables and steam it.
Roast the mustard seed, fenugreek seed, jeera and pound them
separately
Warm oil in a vessel. Remove half the quantity of oil.
Then add vegetables, turmeric powder, slit garlic and all other
roasted ingredients.
Remove from flame after 1 minute add remaining oil as well as 50
ml of vinegar.
Bottle it and serve it after 15-20 days.
256
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-vII
mANIPUR
Agronomy & Horticulture
Left over soil moisture after harvesting of kharif paddy should be
utilised low water requirement crops such as lentil, latharus, field
pea, chickpea, and rape seed mustard etc.
Sowing of rabi crops should be started from mid-October to ending
November.
Field pea varieties, Aman, Prakash, Rachna and Aparna should be
sown at a seed rate of 60 to 80kg/ha with a spacing of 30cm x 10cm.
Chickpea var. JG-14, JG-16 should be taken up at a seed rate of 60-
80kg/ha with spacing 30cm x 10cm.
Lentil variety HUL-57 can either be grown in residual moisture
(utera cultivation/relay cropping) or with little irrigation after
harvest of paddy with a seed rate of 40-50 kg/ha at a spacing of
30cm × 10cm.
For acidic soil, liming should be done at sowing time by using Ca
CO3 @ 500 kg/ ha in furrows. Apply NPK@ 20:40:20 kg/ha for rabi
pulses.
Rapeseed-mustard
As relay crop- If soil moisture is optimum (when step on the soil,
footprints are observable but not much impression is made) and
supposed to be dried up at the time of harvesting, the seeds should
be sown just before 4-7 days of harvesting rice crop so that it can
germinate using the conserved moisture.
Sowing seeds and straw mulching: Seeds should be sown directly
into the field and planking follows to fall down the stiff stubbles
and then rice straw should be scattered very thinly over the entirely
field.
257