ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-vI
AssAm
Field crops
Transplanted early Ahu Rice
Field selection: Areas with assured irrigation facilities should be
selected. Heavy to medium textured soils are preferred.
Nursery management: Seeds are to be put in plain water, stirred
well and floated ones are to be discarded. Seeds should be sown
in nursery bed during mid-February. Land is to be thoroughly
puddled and seed beds of 1.25 m breadth and 10 m length (may be
increased or decreased as per the requirement) are prepared with
30 cm gap in between beds. In each seed bed 20-30 kg cow dung
or compost, 80 g urea, 80 g SSP and 40 g MOP are to be applied.
Well germinated seeds are sown @ 650 to 1000 g per bed. Seed
requirement for transplanting one hectare of main field is 40-45 kg.
In case of hybrid varieties, seed are to be sown @ 250 -300 g/bed
and seed requirement for transplanting 1 ha area is 7.5 kg.
Transplanting is to be done by putting 2-3 seedlings per hill at a
depth of 4-5 cm in semi dwarf varieties and 1 seedling per hill for
hybrid. The spacing is 20 cm x 15 cm. Recommended fertilizer
dose is 40 kg N, 20 kg P O and 20 kg K O per hectare in case of
2 5 2
semi dwarf varieties. Only one third of the total urea, full doses of
super phosphate and potash are to be applied at the time of final
puddling. The 2nd one third and 3rd one third doses of urea are to
be applied at tillering and panicle initiation stages respectively. Top
dressing of urea should be preceded by weeding. In case of hybrid
varieties, recommended fertilizer doses are 100 kg N, 60 kg P O
2 5
and 60 kg K O per hectare and urea fertilizer is to be applied in 4
2
equal splits i.e., at the time of final puddling, at maximum tillering,
at panicle initiation and at booting stage.
233
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Wheat
Sandy loam to silty loam soils, rich in organic matter are suitable.
Clayey soil is not suitable for wheat.
Seed priming should be done by soaking the seeds overnight before
sowing, for faster emergence and uniform crop establishment.
A seed rate of 100-120 kg/ha is adequate. Row to row distance of
20 cm is to be maintained for optimum plant population. Depth of
sowing should be 3-5 cm but not deeper than 5 cm.
In case of dry topsoil, pre-sowing irrigation is to be applied 3-4
days before sowing for quick and uniform germination of seeds.
Two irrigations of 6 cm depth have been recommended for all the
agro-climatic zones. The first irrigation must be applied at crown
root initiation stage (20-25 days after sowing) of the crop and the
second one at heading stage (70-75 days after sowing). Irrigation
should be avoided when ground water table remains within 50 cm
of the root zone.
Maize
In case hybrids maize, it is advised not to keep seeds from previous
year’s harvest for sowing in the following years. However, seeds
from composite varieties can be kept for sowing in the following
year, without appreciable decrease in yield.
Well drained sandy loam soil is to be selected, Field should be free
from water logging.
Optimum time of sowing is middle of September to middle of
November.
Spacing of 60 cm between rows and 20 cm between plants should
be maintained.
Buckwheat
Optimum time of sowing is September-October for Upper
Brahmaputra Valley Zone and October-Mid November for Lower
Brahmaputra Valley Zone.
234
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed rate is 20 kg/ha (2.7 kg/bigha) and spacing is 30 cm between
rows is recommended.
Foxtail millet
Optimum time of sowing is middle of January to middle of
February (the best time is last week of January). Seed rate is 8-10
kg/ha, which may be increased to 15 kg/ha under broadcast sowing.
Spacing should be 25 cm between rows.
Lentil
Newly recommended varieties are HUL 57 (small seed lentil
variety), Axom Masur 1 (SL 2-24) and Axom Masur 2 (SL 2-28).
Optimum time of sowing is mid-October to mid-November and
recommended seed rate is 30 kg/ha or 4 kg/bigha. The seeds are
to be sown in line at a spacing of 25 cm between rows and 5-7 cm
from seed to seed.
Rapeseed and Mustard
Recommended toria varieties are TS 36, TS 38, and M-27 with 90
-95 days duration. Newly recommended varieties suitable for late
sowing are Jeuti, TS 46 and TS 67.
Some newly recommended Indian Mustard varieties are NRCHB –
101, PM 26 and PM 27 having crop duration of 107 days.
Optimum seed rate is 10 kg/ha (1.3 kg/bigha) for toria and seed
rate will be 8 kg/ha for mustard.
A seed proportion of 75:25 of toria + lentil mixed is recommended
for Hills Zone only. As pure crop, a seed rate of 6-8 kg/ha is
recommended for Hills Zone.
Seed rate of rainfed late sown toria after sali paddy (rice-toria
sequence) should be 13 kg/ha, i.e., 33% higher than normal
recommended rate of 10 kg/ha.
The optimum time of sowing is middle of October to middle of
November. Early sowing helps in escaping the attack of aphids.
235
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
In Barak Valley Zone, rapeseed and mustard can be sown as late
as November 30 in upland condition and up to third week of
November in medium upland condition.
Irrigation of 6 cm depth of water may be applied either at 50%
flowering or at early siliqua formation stage. In case a rainfall of 20-
25 mm is received during this period, no post sowing irrigation is
essential. Pre-sowing irrigation is normally not required for timely
sown crop. However, in dry areas, pre-sowing irrigation may be
applied. As moisture conservation tillage practice for rapeseed
after sali rice, one cross ploughing by power tiller incorporating
rice stubbles is recommended.
Linseed
Optimum time of sowing is from middle of October to middle of
November. In Barak Valley Zone sowing can be done in December
after harvest of sali paddy. Seed Rate is 15-20 kg/ha. Spacing should
be 25 cm between rows and 10 cm between plants.
It can also be grown as relay crop with kharif rice.se3
Niger
Time of sowing is October (September to middle of October for
Lower Brahmaputra Valley Zone).
Seed Rate should be 8 kg/ha (1.1 kg/bigha) for line sowing and 12
kg/ha (1.5 kg/bigha) for broadcast crop.
Recommended spacing is 25 cm between rows and 5-7 cm between
plants
Potato
Well drained sandy loam and loam soils, rich in organic matter are
suitable. A pulse crop should preferably be included in the rotation
to improve the soil condition.
Field should be thoroughly ploughed to obtain a good tilth. It
should be levelled for uniform distribution of irrigation water or
236
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
to maintain soil moisture uniformly under rainfed situation. The
furrows should be prepared at 50 cm apart.
The optimum time for planting is mid-October to mid-November.
In case of Kufri Sindhuri planting may be extended up to middle
of December.
Virus free, healthy, medium sized sprouted tubers are to be selected
for planting. Ideal size is about 2.5 cm in diameter (25-40 g). Bigger
sized tubers may be cut into pieces longitudinally with 2-3 eyes
in each piece. In case of cut seeds, the pieces are to be dipped in
Mancozeb @ 5 g in 1 litre of water for about 10 minutes. After
treatment, the seeds are to be spread thinly and dried under shade
for 48 hours or should be covered with moist gunny bags for 2-3
days for suberization.
The seed requirement is 22.5-25 q/ha when size of the tubers is
about 2.5 cm in diameter (about 25 g) and planted with an intra
row spacing of 15 cm. Intra row spacing is increased with bigger
sized tuber.
The sprouted tubers should be planted in furrows with sprouts
facing upward. Care should be taken to avoid sprout damage while
handling the tubers.
The furrow method of irrigation must be adopted. Three irrigations
should be applied, first at 25 days (stolon formation stage),
second at 60 days (tuber formation stage) and third at 80 days
(tuber development stage) after emergence of sprouts. In case of
application of mulching materials in furrows, only two irrigations
are to be applied at 25 and 60 days after emergence of sprouts. At
the time of application of irrigation, care should be taken not to
submerge the ridges completely.
Horticultural crops
For nursery raising of rabi vegetables, sunny area with well drained
friable light soil rich in organic matter should be selected. The
nursery bed should be 1 m width and of convenient length. The
237
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
bed should be raised to 10-15 cm above the ground level.
Important varieties of straw berry are ‘Sweet Charlie’, ‘Festival’,
‘Chandler’ etc. Straw berry is propagated through runner and best
time for planting is November.
Livestock
The livestock and poultry shed need be repaired before winter, so
that they can be protected from inclement weather (cold wind).
The sides of the shed may be covered with polythene sheet or
gunny cloth to obstruct the flow of wind. Shady trees around the
shed should be trimmed.
The livestock are needed to be fed silage, hay, edible tree fodders
as well as chopped paddy straw (3-5 kg) daily to sustain the milk
production during rabi (cold) season.
Farmers are suggested to provide artificial heat source to their
newborn piglets and poultry chicks during rabi season, if needed.
Disease surveillance and monitoring network to be established.
List out the endemic diseases of birds (species wise) in the district
and store vaccines for those diseases.
Timely vaccination against all endemic.
Ensure de-worming of livestock (cattle, goat, sheep and pigs)
immediately after rainy season.
Livestock farmers are suggested for regular supplementation of
mineral mixture @ 50-60 g/day/ adult cows and calcium to the
lactating cows @ 60-80 ml/day/cow.
Suitable bedding (paddy straw, dry grass, wheat bhusa, saw dust,
rice husk etc.) to the depth of 4-6 inches in large animals and 2
inches for smaller animals should be provided on puccaa (concrete)
floor.
Bathing of animals with cold water during winter should be avoided
Hairs of animals should not be clipped during winter.
238
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
All the farmers are requested to contact KVKs at district level for
any kind of advisories.
Fish Farming
Pond construction, pond preparation and pre stocking management
of fish culture needs to be completed by the rabi season. During
pond construction one should not dig out a pond in upland.
Before construction one may perform soil testing at Krishi Vigyan
Kendra. Location with Silt loam soil, less sandy and soil with
higher water holding capacity are suitable for pond construction.
Ideal soil for pond construction needs to have Nitrogen 30-50 %,
Phosphorus 6-16%, Organic Carbon 1-2%, Calcium carbonate 5%
and pH 6.5-7.5.
In case of old pond, removal of pond muck is most essential as a
measure for pre stocking management during this season.
De-silting of pond bottom has to be done every 3 years for better
release of nutrients for higher fish growth.
Liming is done to correct the pond soil pH by applying initial dose/
basal dose as per existing value of soil pH.
Monitoring of fish health and behaviour, feeding intensity are to be
done on regular basis.
The water quality parameter has to be checked regularly as most of
the diseases prevail in winter season.
Farmers are advised to use low protein diet as the rate of feeding
and metabolic activities decreases during winter and advised
to reduce adding of organic manure such as cow dung, poultry
droppings and pig dung in the pond as the rate of decomposition
decreases during winter.
239
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
sIKKIm
General Advisory for Rabi Season:
Sowing should be done within the optimum sowing time of the
rabi crops.
Mulching should be done through locally available biomass to
conserve soil moisture for rabi crops and suppress the weed growth.
Zero till cultivation of vegetable pea/toria/buckwheat can be taken
up in rice fallow to utilize the residual soil moisture.
Nursery should be raised for cole crops (cabbage, cauliflower,
broccoli), onion, rayasaag etc. under protected condition.
Nursery bed should be protected from rain (Silpauline: 45GSM) to
avoid losses during unexpected rain.
COVID protocol and measures to be followed while working in
the field.
Application of lime @ 1 t/ha 15-20 days before sowing the seed
may be done for increasing availability of nutrients to the plants.
For plant protection measures, spray neem-based formulation
(1500 ppm) @ 0.3% as and when required to all the crops.
Agricultural crops
Rajsmah
Sowing of Rajmash seed should be done by last week of August
for getting maximum yield. Recommended varieties are – Sikkim
Rajma-1, Jwala, Tripura Rajmash Selection 1 etc.
Sowing of rajmash should be done on the ridge (ridge-furrow) to
avoid seed deterioration due to water logging from continuation
rain and proper drainage channel to be made.
Apply FYM 5 t/ha + 2.0 t/ha vermicompost + 20 kg/ha biofertilizer.
Seed rate of rajmash should be @ 70-80 kg/ha with spacing 30 cm
x10 cm.
240