ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
CHHATTIsgARH
Wheat
High yielding and improved varieties of wheat suitable for
irrigated eco systems are as follows: Ratan, Chhattisgarh Gehun-2,
C.G. Gehun-3, Chhattisgarh Amber wheat, Kanishka (C.G.-1029),
Chhattisgarh Hansa Gehun, Chhattisgarh Gehun-1023, H.W.
2004, Lok-1, Sujata, H.I-1500, G.W. 273, D.L. 803-3 (Kanchan),
G.W. 322, M.P.-4010, D.L.-788-2 (Vidisha), G.W. 173.
Duram wheat: H.D.-4672, H.I. 4498, H.I.-8381, H.L.-8627,
H.I.-8713, M.P.-1215.
Aestivum wheat: Ratan, H.I.-1531, G.W.-366, H.I.-1544, M.P.-
3336, M.P.-1203, H.D.-2332, H.D.-2864, J.W.-3288.
Sowing of wheat should be completed by 25th November for timely
sown varieties however, for late sown condition, early maturing
varieties be sown between 25th November to 15th December. For
timely sown condition, seed rate should be 100-125 kg/ha however
for late sown condition, 125-150 kg seed should be sown per
hectare.
Before sowing, seed should be treated by Carboxin @ 2 g per kg
seed. Row to row spacing should be 20 cm. However, 100 to 120 kg
Nitrogen, 60 kg Phosphorus and 40 kg Potash should be applied as
a blanket application. Actual quantity of nutrients should be ase3d
on soil health tests.
Irrigation should be applied at critical Root initiation, tillering,
jointing, booting, flowering, milk, and dough stages in case of
sufficient water availability to fetch maximum yield.
For weed management, Metsulfuron methyl 1.6-gram active
ingredient per acre @ 25-30 days after sowing should be applied
for effective control of broad leaf weeds under optimum moisture
condition in the field. Pinoxaden, 16-20-gram active ingredient per
acre @ 320-400 gram/m.l. should be applied @ 25-30 days after
332
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
sowing for narrow leaf weed control. Pinoxaden + Carfentrazone
(20+8 g active ingredient) should be applied @ 25-30 days after
sowing for controlling all types of weeds under optimum moisture
condition.
Chickpea
Chickpea is a major pulse crop of Chhattisgarh plains. Following
improved varieties are recommended for cultivation: G.G.-1
(Gujarat Gram-1), JAKI-9218, J.G.-16, Vaibhav, J.G.-130, J.G.G.-1,
J.G.-14, Indira Chana-1, J.S.C.-55, J.S.C.-56, B.G.D.-128 (Pusa
Shubhra), I.P.C.K.-2002-29, I.P.C.K.-2004-29, I.P.C.-2066-77.
According to soil type and availability of irrigation or time of
sowing any one of the above varieties can be selected for sowing.
Kanhar soils of Chhattisgarh plains are suitable for chickpea
cultivation. Sowing should be done between 15th October to 30th
November.
Seed rate for timely sowing chickpea should be 75-80 kg per
hectare however, if sowing is delayed beyond 30th November,
then seed rate should be increased by 25 kg/ha. In some parts of
Chhattisgarh, utera crop is also taken, in case of utera (Relay), seed
rate should be 100 kg/ha.
Seed should be treated by Carbendazim @ 2 g per kg seed for
protection from soil borne fungal diseases.
After treatment with fungicide seed should be treated by Rhizobium
and P.S.B. Culture @ 5 g/kg seed followed by Trichoderma @ 5 g/ha
seed, treated seed should be shade dried before sowing.
Sowing of chickpea should be done with the row spacing of 30 cm.
20 kg Nitrogen, 40 kg Phosphorus, 20 kg Potash and 20 kg Sulphur
should be given as basal dose. For good yield light irrigation should
be insured at branching and flowering stage.
Gram pod borer is the major insect of chickpea. For managing the
insect apply Nuclear Polyhydrosis Virus 250 L.E. @ 500 litre water
per hectare at morning and evening time. Bird perches should
333
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
be fixed in the field after every 5 metres. 5 Pheromone traps per
hectare are also effective in monitoring the insect. Pheromone
septa should be changed after 15 days.
If one caterpillar per square metre is observed, then apply
Profenophos + Cypermethrin 44 E.C. or Profenophos 50 E.C. @ 1
litre per hectare.
Lathyrus
Lathyrus crop is taken in dorsa and kanhar soils of Chhattisgarh,
sole as well as relay crop. Improved varieties of lathyrus are advised
as follows- Ratan, Prateek and Maha Tiwda.
Sowing of lathyrus should be completed between 15th October
to 15th November, seed should be sown @ 40-50 kg/ha. In some
parts, lathyrus is taken as relay crop or uter or paira and sown in
standing crop of rice, in that case, seed rate should be 75-90 kg/ha.
Before sowing, seed should be treated by 3-gram Thirum per kg
seed, there after by Rhizobium and P.S.B. Culture @ 5 gram per kg
seed, then sowing should be done after shade drying. Row to row
spacing for sole crop should be 30 cm.
20 kg Nitrogen, 40 kg Phosphorus, 20 kg Potash and 20 kg Sulphur
should be applied in the soil at sowing time.
Field pea
Following improved varieties of Field pea are advised for
cultivation- Ambika, Adarsh (I.P.F. 99-25), Shubhra, Paras, Vikas,
Prakash, I.P.F.D.-10-12, Indira Matar-1, I.P.F.D. 12-2 and Pant P
243. Any one of above varieties as per the availability of seed can
be taken.
Powdery mildew is the common disease of field pea, in the
occurrence of this white powdery spots on upper side of leaves
appear. For controlling the disease, timely sowing should be done,
balanced fertilizer be applied, and Sulphur dust should be used @
25-30 kg/ha. For spray soluble Sulphur, @3 g/litre water be sprayed
as soon as symptoms appear and be repeated after 15 days.
334
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Linseed
Prominent recommended varieties of linseed are as follows- R-552,
Kiran, T-397, Padmini, Shekhar, Indira Alsi-32, kartika, Deepika,
Indravati Alsi, R.L.C.-133, R.L.C.-143, R.L.C.-148, R.L.C.-153.
Linseed is an important oilseed crop of Chhattisgarh suitable for
cultivation in dorsa and Kanhar (mid lands) soils of Chhattisgarh.
In Chhattisgarh, optimum sowing time of linseed is from October
to mid-November. Seed rate should be 30 kg/ha for rainfed and
20-25 kg/ha for irrigated condition.
Seed should be treated with Carbendazim @ 2 g/kg seed to protect
the crop from seed and soil borne disease. Linseed should be sown
in the row to row spacing of 25-30 cm in rainfed condition.
40 kg Nitrogen, 20 kg Phosphorus and 20 kg Potash should be
applied as basal in rainfed however, in case of irrigated ecosystems
60 kg, Nitrogen, 30 kg Phosphorus and 30 kg Potash should be
applied at the time of sowing.
Mustard
Mustard is a potential oilseed crop of Chhattisgarh, following
improved varieties are recommended for sowing in the state- Pusa
Jai Kisan (B.W.-902), Pusa Bold, Kranti (P.R.-15), Vardan (R.K.
1467), Varuna (T-59), Chhattisgarh Sarson-1, Indira Toria-1.
Sowing of mustard should be done between 15th October to
15th November, optimum seed rate is 4-5 kg/ha. Before sowing,
seed should be treated with Carbendazim @ 1.5-2 g/kg seed. 100
kg Nitrogen, 80 kg Phosphorus and 40 kg Potash is sufficient for
good yield. Irrigation should be ensured at branching, flowering,
and siliqua formation. Leaf blight is observed in some parts, for
controlling the same, seed should be treated before sowing and
apply Propeconazole @ 1 ml per litre of water and repeat the spray
after 15 days.
335
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Safflower
Following varieties have been found suitable for cultivation
in Chhattisgarh- A-1, Naari N.H.-1, Naari H-15, H.U.S.-305,
Manjeera, P.B.N.S.-12, Naari-6, P.B.N.S.-40, Parbhani Kusum,
Phule Kusum (J.L.S.F.-414), S.S.H.-129, Naari-38, S.S.F.-658.
In Chhattisgarh, 15th October to 15th November is the most
optimum period for safflower sowing. Seed rate should be 10-15
kg/ha. Spacing between row-to-row sowing should be 45 cm. 90
kg Nitrogen, 40 kg Phosphorus and 30 kg Potash should be applied
to fulfil the nutritive requirement of the crop.
Lentil
Lentil is also an important pulse crop which is grown in dorsa and
kanhar soils. Suitable varieties are as follows- Lens-4076, I.P.L.-81
(Noori), J.L.-3, I.P.L.-316, R.V.L. 11-6, L-4717 (Pusa ageti Masoor),
R.K.L.14-20 (Kota Masoor-2), L-4727, Kota Masoor-1 (RKL-607-
1), Chhattisgarh Masoor-1.
Lentil should be sown between 15th October to 15th November,
optimum seed rate is 40-45 kg / ha. Seed should be treated with
Rhizobium and Trichoderma culture, P.S.B. @ 5-10 grams per kg
seed, then after shade drying, sowing be completed. Optimum row
to row spacing is 23-25 c.m.
20 Kg. Nitrogen, 40-50 kg Phosphorus, 20 kg Potash and 20 kg
Sulphur should be applied for fulfilling nutritional requirement of
the crop for potential yield.
Fodder Crops
Maize:
Maize is a good fodder crop for well drained sandy loam soils
under irrigated condition. It should be sown by the end of
February in summer crop and October- November in rabi season
crop. Seed rate should be 50-60 kg / ha with 100 kg Nitrogen,
40 kg Phosphorus and 40 kg Potash fertilizer / ha. Half dose of
336
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Nitrogen should be given at sowing time, while remaining half at
knee high stage. Following improved varieties are recommended
for cultivation in Chhattisgarh- African Tall, Pratap Makka Chari
– 6, Vijay, G.F.- 405, J.- 1006.
Fodder maize is sensitive for drought and water logging. During
summer, irrigation should be given in 10-12 days interval and in
rabi 15-20 days interval.
Hybrid Napier
Hybrid Napier is a multi-cut perennial fast growing fodder crop.
Although maximum fodder production is harvested during rainy
season and summer months. This fodder gives higher production,
good quality and digestibility. During winter growth becomes
slow. Once planted root slips give fodder for 2-3 years by good
management.8 to 9 % crude protein is found in this fodder.
Following varieties are recommended for cultivation- C.O. -3,
C.O.-5, R.B.N.-13, Sampoorn (DNH-6), IGFRI-7 and 10.
Under irrigated condition, it should be planted by root or stem
cuttings in February- March. Planting should be done in 60 cm
row to row and plant to plant spacing, 30000 to 35000 rooted slips
are required for one-hectare area. During last field preparation, 20-
25 tonnes well-rotted F.Y.M. be incorporated in the soil and during
transplanting 60 kg Nitrogen, 50 kg Phosphorus, and 40 kg Potash
per hectare should be given basal and 30 kg Nitrogen be given after
each cutting. First cut is obtained after 60-75 days of planting and
after each 40-45 days 5 to 6 cuttings can be done.
Berseem
Berseem is the most important rabi fodder crop since it gives 4
to 5 cuts from November to March. The fodder is very nutritive
and liked by the animals, it fixes atmospheric nitrogen into the
soil being leguminous crop. It contains 17 to 21% protein, 12 to
15% dry matter and is very digestive. Following varieties are found
good for cultivation in Chhattisgarh- Maskavi, Vardan, Bundel
337
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Berseem-2, Bundel Berseem-3, J.B.-5, Pusa Jiant, U.P.B.-110, JHTB
96-4, B.L.-22.
Berseem should be sown from 15 October to 15 November for
taking 5-6 cuts. Optimum seed rate is 25-30 kg / ha. 20 kg Nitrogen,
80 kg Phosphorus and 40 kg Potash per hectare be applied for good
harvest.
For weed control Oxyflorfen 0.1 kg a.i. and Emzethapyre 0.1 kg
a.i. per hectare should be applied immediately after first harvest.
Irrigation be given after 15-20 days interval and in March-April, at
the interval of 10 to 12 days.
Vegetable Crops
Tomato:
Tomato is taken almost round the year, the following improved
varieties are recommended for cultivation in Chhattisgarh- Pusa
early Dwarf, Sweet 72, Pusa Ruby, Pusa Gaurav, Naveen, Mangala,
C.O.-1, C.O.-2, PantTamatar-3, DVRT-2, C.o.-3, N.S.-815,
avinash-2, Selection-7, Arka Rakshhak.
Sowing should be completed in October- November, seed should
be done @ 400-500 gram / ha in O.P. varieties and 125-150 gram /
ha in case of hybrid varieties. Seed should be treated with Thirum
@ 2.5 gram / kg seed. 150 kg Nitrogen, 100 kg phosphorus and
75 kg potash should be applied. For controlling Damping Off soil
solarization is the most effective measure. Seed should be treated
by Thirum@ 2.5 gram per kg seed or Copper Oxy chloride @ 3
gram per kg seed.
Seed should be treated by Trichoderma powder or Trichoderma +
Pseudomonas @ 8-10 gram per kg seed.
Cauliflower:
Following varieties should be selected for sowing during October-
November- Early Kunwari, Pusa Kartik, Pusa Dipali, pusa shubha,
Pusa Snowball-2, Pusa sharad.
338
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sowing should be completed in September-October at the rate of
400-500 gram per hectare. 150kg Nitrogen, 80 kg Phosphorus and
75 kg Potash be applied.
Cabbage:
Following varieties should be selected for sowing during October-
November- Golden Acre, Pusa Synthetic, Harirani, Ganesh Gol,
Pusa Drumhead, Late drumhead.
Sowing should be completed in September-October at the rate of
400-500 gram per hectare. 150kg Nitrogen, 80 kg Phosphorus and
75 kg Potash be applied.
Onion:
Following varieties are recommended for cultivation in rabi season
in Chhattisgarh- Agrifound Dark Red, N-53, Bheema Super,
Bheema Dark Red, Bheema shakti, Bheema shrubhra, Bheema
Shweta.
339
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sowing should be completed by 15th November; seed should be
applied at the rate of 8-10 kg / ha.
Vegetable Pea:
Suitable varieties for Chhattisagrh- Arkel, Jawahar Matar-1,
Jawahar Matar-2, Azad Matar -3, Pant sbji Matar-3.
Sowing should be completed in October-November at the rate of
80-100 kg / ha.
Chilli:
Following varieties are recommended- Pusa Jwala, Pusa Sadabahar,
Indira mirch-1, Jawahar Mirch-218.
Sowing should be completed in September-October at the rate of
500 grams / ha for normal and 200 grams /ha for hybrids.
Potato:
Following varieties are suitable for cultivation- Kufri Khyati, Kufri
Pukhraj, Kufri Surya, Kufri Badsahah, Kufri Leema, Kufri Jawahar,
Kufri Arun, Kufri Pushkar, Kufri Chipsona-1, Kufri Chipsona-2,
Kufri Chipsona-3, Kufri Fryo and Kufri Frysona.
For the control of Early blight, apply Copper Oxychloride or
Mancozeb @ 3 gram / lr. of water, spray should be repeated after
10-15 days intervals. For late blight, apply Metlaxyl M.Z. @ 1 gram
per litre of water and repeat the same after 10-15 days intervals 3
times.
Livestock and Fisheries:
Animal Husbandry:
Animal Vaccinations Pre-Winter needs to be done. Vaccination
against Foot and Mouth Disease in Cattle, Buffalo, Sheep, Goat
and Pigs is to be repeated since it is given pre-monsoon and
prewinter, twice in a year. Sheep and Goats to be vaccinated against
Enterotoxaemia, Goat Pox and PPR disease during early months of
340
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Rabi season say Early Sept. to Oct. For poultry, vaccination schedule
is to be followed as per age of the birds regardless of season.
Artificial Insemination needs to be continued. For this, farmers
should check their animals for signs of heat, especially during
winter when the symptoms of heat are sometimes obscure. It is
always advised to contact veterinary officer or para veterinary
worker and get the animal inseminated at home instead of taking
them to veterinary hospital, this becomes more relevant due to the
current Covid Pandemic situation.
To maintain productivity and improve immune status of animals,
farmers are suggested for regular supplementation of mineral
minute - 60g/ day in adult dairy animals and 20-30g in small
ruminants.
Try to deworm animals using broad spectrum dewormer as per
advice of veterinary doctor & remove ecto-parasites using safe
insecticide sprays, one to two weeks prior to vaccination. When
applying insecticide spray it is important to dilute them in water as
per recommendation of the manufacturer and proper mask needs
to be worn by the person using the spray.
The frequency of washing and bathing animals should be
reduced during peak winter months. Animal housing needs to be
strengthened so that cold exposure to animals may be minimized.
This is especially important for northern parts of the state.
Demand for meat and meat products increases during winter
season and farmers need to plan their production cycle so that they
can sell their meat animals during this season. Poultry and Goat
farmers need to increase the fat and carbohydrate portion of the
diet of animals so as to increase their body weight faster and fetch
more market price.
Farmers should practice physical distancing, regular washing of
hands and wearing mask whenever they go to market for sale and
purchase of farm produce. Give preference to online marketing
341
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
channels and prefer selling direct to customer to fetch more price
and this also reduces going to crowded marketplaces.
Fodder Cultivation and Preservation
Sowing of Fodder Crops like Maize, Jowar, Oat etc. and Leguminous
fodder crops like Barseem, Lucerne and Cowpea etc. should be
initiated with the onset of Rabi Season. Procurement of seed, land
preparation and inputs required for cultivation of fodder crops
should be started as early as possible.
During the late part of Rabi season, when harvesting of crops are
done, it is highly advised to preserve fodder for summer season
when there is imminent scarcity of fodder for livestock. For central
and southern parts of Chhattisgarh making ‘hay’ is advised while
in northern cooler parts of the state, making ‘silage’, along with
‘hay’ is advised.
For making hay crops like oat, napier, lucerne, berseem, peas,
cowpea, chick pea, field bean, are suitable and for silage making
crops like maize, jowar, para grass and Napier are most suitable for
the state.
Paddy straw needs to be stored as dry fodder in quantities sufficient
to cover entire winter and summer till monsoon. Enrichment of
paddy straw by urea treatment should be undertaken. Neem coated
urea can also be used for this purpose.
Feed requirement for animals and human being is generally more
during winter. Increase the animal ration by 5-10% during winter
season to maintain production of animals.
Take special care so that agricultural pesticides and disinfectants do
not get mixed with animal feed and fodder even in little quantities.
Cattle and Buffalo
In Chhattisgarh as per the breeding policy Artificial Insemination
is preferred in rural areas using Indian Cattle Milch Breeds - Gir,
Red Sindhi and Sahiwal and Dual Breed – Tharparker, Ongole,
342
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Kankrej and Hariana while in semiurban area Cross Breeding with
half bred Jersey and HF is advised. In urban areas and large dairy
farms depending on the rearing condition and market demand AI
services is advised.
Purchase of animals for dairy farming is advised during early
months of Rabi season because of suitability of climate, high
availability of green fodder and possibility of getting Kisan Credit
Card linked loans from financial institutions is more soon after
Kharif season is over, and MSP are released.
Animals need protection from cold winds especially during
night. Open sheds need to be partially covered using gunny bags
and adequate bedding materials. However, proper ventilation
is important in cattle shed in winter especially in northern and
southern parts of the state which tends to get suffocative.
Provide green succulent forage together with leguminous hay
or straw to the extent of animal can consume, so that all its
maintenance requirements are met with through forage only.
Extra concentrate at the rate of 1 kg for every 2 to 2.5 litres of milk
should be provided. Salt and mineral supplements should be given
to maintain the lactation.
High milking breeds require calcium supplementation in order to
prevent metabolic diseases like milk fever and ketosis.
Water requirement decreases a little during winter. However, in
very cold periods warm water must be provided. Watch individual
animal for symptoms of mucous secretion from muzzle, sneezing,
cough or difficulty in breathing, in the event of which immediate
veterinary aid should be sought.
Provide at least 60 - 90 days dry period between calving. If the dry
period is not sufficient, the milk yield is subsequent lactation will
be reduced. Extra concentrate mix of 1.25 to 1.75 kg should be
provided for pregnant animal as pregnancy allowance.
Wallowing of buffaloes in water is best avoided in winter months.
343
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Feed laxative about 3 - 5 days before and after calving (Wheat bran
3 kg + 0.5 gm of Groundnut cake + 100 gm of mineral mixture of
salt).
Cattle and buffaloes are not seasonal breeders, hence care
and management of pregnant animals, during parturition,
after parturition and care and handling of newborn calf is as
recommended throughout the year. However, since research
indicates more incidence of dystokia in winter, farmers are
advised to be more vigilant and keep veterinary officer informed
beforehand regarding the scheduled date of parturition.
Small Ruminants (Goats)
Farmers are advised to start preparing for breeding of sheep and
goats in Rabi season by increasing ration for breedable male and
female goats and keeping close observation for signs of heat. Being
seasonal breeders, they tend to breed from September to November
but may continue to February. This is more prominent in northern
Chhattisgarh while in rest of the state, being truly tropical they
breed throughout the year.
Goat farmers of Central and North Chhattisgarh may choose
among breeds like Jamunapari, Beetal and Sirohi while Southern
regions may prefer Black Bengal instead of Sirohi. Farmers need
to upgrade their desi nondescript goat stocks with male of these
breeds.
The males should be replaced or exchanged once in two years to
avoid inbreeding. Hence, all replacements should be done before
the onset of Rabi so that the new animal inducted may have
sufficient time for acclimatization.
In order to synchronize them improved hormonal technology may
be used, or buck may be in a partitioned corral of woven-wire net
so that the does and the buck may have full view of each other. This
may be done a week or two before or during the breeding season.
344
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Efforts should always be made to avoid kidding during the peak
winter season of January month which can be practically achieved
by a planned breeding avoiding summer season within a specified
period between 15th May to 15th June. This will save the kids from
cold susceptibility and resultant pneumonic death during winter.
Goats are particularly sensitive to cold and winter rains triggers
many diseases. Farmers of northern regions of the state should
provide covered night shelters during peak winter but should
not use fireplace or sigri to warm the closed shelter because this
may lead to quick accumulation of noxious gasses and can be life
threatening.
Small and weak animals should be covered with a body cover made
from jute gunny bags or cotton cloth. Such animals should be given
warm water with added jiggery.
The beddings of animals need to be replaced more frequently
during Rabi. This will protect them from cold as well as diseases
especially parasitic diseases.
In this season due to close contact of herding animals like sheep
and goats’ infectious diseases spreads faster. Farmers need to be
vigilant for off-feed animals and symptoms like running nose,
sneezing, and coughing.
During this season, to escape from severe winter, large flocks of
migratory sheep and goats arrive from parts of HP, UP, Gujrat
and Rajasthan into the central parts of Chhattisgarh through
MP and Maharashtra. All such flocks, if not previously, need to
be vaccinated against HS, FMD, PPR and Enterotoxaemia and
quarantined for 15 days at border areas. Local sheep and goat
farmers should make every attempt not to allow their own flocks
to mix with these migratory herds.
Commercial and Backyard Poultry
Commercial large poultry farms have little seasonal variation in
their rearing practice. However, due to increased market demand
345
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
they should plan their production cycle so that their output
increases by a significant margin to gain more profits, loess stocking
and cater to consumer requirement.
Commercial poultry farmers should adhere strictly to their
vaccination schedule which is dependent on age of birds rather
than seasonality. However, Rural Backyard Poultry Farmers need
to vaccinate their birds against Ranikhet Disease and Fowl Pox.
Due to proximity of birds in winter communicable disease spreads
very fast. Hence strict daily vigil must be done for a sample of birds
in large farm or each and individual bird in the flocks reared under
backyard condition. If disease symptoms like drooping, ruffled
feathers, coryza, discoloration or pock marks erupting in comb and
wattles, diarrhea with white or reddish discoloration are observed
the birds need to be quarantined immediately for 5-7 days or till
full recovery is attained as per advice of registered veterinary
practitioner or para-veterinary personnel under supervision.
Deworming of backyard poultry with any broad spectrum
dewormer is advised before onset of Rabi as per veterinary advice
and prevalence of parasitic diseases in the area.
Disinfect the premises of poultry houses with 1% sodium
hypochlorite and restrict the entry of any outsider to the poultry
houses and premises.
The moisture and quality of the litter materials in poultry shed
need to be maintained to prevent coccidiosis infestation.
Migratory Birds arrive in parts of Eastern Central Chhattisgarh
from parts of Odisha and Northern Chhattisgarh from parts of
North India. Hence, poultry farmers must be vigilant not to allow
their poultry in direct or indirect contact with the migratory
birds. In case of any unusual death of migratory, poultry or any
other birds in the area farmers should immediately inform nearest
Veterinary Officer.
346
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fisheries
Farmers are advised to stock larger size advanced fingerlings in the
perennial stocking ponds, community ponds and reservoirs.
Every month in Rabi fish farmers need to apply lime at the rate of
10 Kg per acre in perennial water bodies.
Organic and inorganic fertilizers should be applied for production
of natural feeds. Doses should be decided as per organic carbon
content in the soil.
Fishes should be fed supplementary feed at the rate of 10% body
weight along with natural feed.
Supplementation of Vitamin and Mineral Mixture at the rate of 1%
of feed weight (1 Kg per 100 Kg feed) should be continued.
Netting should be done monthly to release the noxious gasses from
the pond bottom for observing fishes for disease symptoms and
recording growth of fishes for calculating feed required.
Since in Rabi rain and other water sources from catchment area
generally decreases hence alternative ground water source should
be made ready.
To have regular annual income fish farmers are advised to adopt
Integrated Fish farming model. Under this initiative, due to
decreasing water level in water bodies, especially during later
part of Rabi, combining fisheries with poultry, duck farming and
goatery is advised.
During winter months feed requirement for fish decreases, hence
farmers are advised to decrease the feeding quantity as winter
temperature decreases.
During mid Rabi there is increased demand for fish and fish
products. Hence, farmers should plan their production cycle
so that they harvest maximum during that period to gain more
economically.
347
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-X
ANdHRA PRAdesH
Rice
Varieties recommended during rabi
North Coast Pushkala, Cottondora sannalu, Nellore Mahsuri, Sri Druthi,
Tarangini, Chandra, Sujatha, Sasya, Nellore Dhanyarasi
High altitude Cottondora sannalu, Pushkala, Tarangini, Chandra, Nellore
zone Mahsuri, Nellore Sugandha, Swetha, Sri Druthi
Godavari zone Cottondora sannalu, Prabhat, Nellore Mahsuri, Tarangini,
Chandra, Sri druthi, Nellore Mahsuri, Sujatha, Sasya, Nellore
Dhanyarasi, Nellore Sugandha, Swetha
Krishna zone Cottondora sannalu, Vijetha, IR 64, Tarangini, Chandra, Sri
Druthi, Nellore Sona, Jagityala Sannalu, Nellore Mahsuri
Southern zone Nellore Siri, Nellore Sona, Swarnamukhi, Cottondora
sannalu, Nellore Mahsuri, Tarangini, Swetha, Nellore
Dhanyarasi, Nellore Sugandha
Scarce rainfall Nandyala sannalu, Nandyala Sona, Nellore Mahsuri,
zone Cottondora sannalu, Swetha, Nellore Dhanyarasi, Chandra
Sowing can be taken up to 15th December with a seed rate of 20-25
kg in case of transplanted rice.
Apply 2 kg Nitrogen (4.4 kg of Urea), 1 kg of P O (6.25 kg of SSP)
2 5
and 1kg of K O (1.6 kg of MOP) for a nursery bed of 5 cents (200
2
m2). Apply total P & K fertilizers and ½ N as basal (before final
leveling and thoroughly mixed in the soil). Apply the remaining
½ N at 10-15 days after sowing depending up on seedling growth.
348