ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-I
HImACHAL PRAdesH
Himachal Pradesh is predominantly a hilly state, where majority area
(about 80 %) is rainfed. During Rabi season wheat among cereals,
chickpea & lentil among pulses and sarson among vegetables are
predominant crops. Among vegetables, cole crops, peas, onion,
and garlic are the main crops. Some important advisories to harness
optimum returns are advocated for farmers.
Wheat
HS 542, HPW 360 cultivars of wheat are recommended for low
and mid hill zone of the state under early sown conditions (Up
to 20th October) whereas HPW 155, HPW 349, HPW 249, HPW
236, VL 907, HS 507, HPW 368 are recommended for timely sown
conditions (15 October- 15 November) in these zones. For late
sown conditions (up to December end) VL 892, HPW 373 can be
grown in low and mid hill conditions. HPW 155 and HPW 236 are
recommended cultivars of wheat for high hill zone and Saptdhara
and Him Pratham (DH 114) for high snow-covered areas under
timely sown conditions (1-15th October).
The sowing should be done in lines with spacing of 22 cm with
seed rate of 100 Kg/ha and 150 Kg /ha for timely and late sown
conditions respectively. Before sowing treat the seed with Bavistin
@ 2.5 g/kg of seed. Apply full quantity of SSP (375Kg), MOP (50
Kg) along with 50 per cent of Urea (130 Kg) along with FYM at the
time of sowing while remaining half quantity of Urea should be
given at the time of crown root initiation or occurrence of first rain.
Since, weed causes heavy economic loss to the wheat crop and to
avoid these losses, Vesta @ 400g/ ha or Chlodinafop @ 400g/ha
followed by 2, 4- D @ 1.25 kg/ha after 2-3 days of Clodinofop spray
are recommended for chemical management of weed problems.
15
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The spray should be done after the appearance of 2-3 leaf stage in
weeds.
Among diseases yellow rust and Karnal bunt are major problem in
wheat crop which can be managed by the spray of Tilt @ 1ml per
liter of water at the appearance of the symptoms. Termite is major
pest among all pests in this crop and seed treatment with with
chloropyriphos 20 EC @ 4ml/Kg seed along with soil incorporation
of chloropyriphos 20 EC @ 2 L mixing with 25 Kg sand/ha at the
time of sowing is recommended for the management of this pest.
Chickpea
Himachal chana -1, Himachal chana-2, GPF-2, Palam chana-1,
HPG 17 are the recommended cultivars of chickpea. Treat the seeds
with fungicide (Bavistin @2.5gm/Kg of seed) and biofertilizers like
Rhizobium and Phosphorus solubilizing bacteria before sowing. Go
for sowing of crop at proper soil moisture. Mid October is the best
time for it’s sowing, and sowing should be done in lines with 30 cm
line spacing for all cultivars except HPG 17 for which line spacing
of 50 cm is recommended with optimum depth of 10-12.5 cm. The
seed rate for small & medium sized seeded chickpea cultivars like
Himachal chana -1, Himachal chana-2, GPF-2, Palam chana-1 is
40-45 Kg/ha however, for bold seeded cultivars like HPG 17, seed
rate of 80Kg/ha is recommended. Urea 65 Kg, SSP 375Kg and 50Kg
MOP per ha is recommended for the cultivation of chickpea. The
full dose of SSP, MOP and half dose of Urea should be applied at
the time of sowing while reaming half dose of Urea should be given
to crop after 4-5 weeks of sowing.
For the management of pod borer in chickpea, spray the crop with
Carbaryl 50 WP @1250 gm/ha and apply bavistin @1g / L of water
for the management of Acochyta blight.
Lentil
Vipasha and Markandey are the recommended cultivars of Lentil
which can be sown between October end to mid November
16
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
with seed rate of 25-30Kg/ha. Urea 22Kg and SSP 250Kg/ha is
recommended fertilizers which can be applied at the time of
sowing.
Brown sarson and Gobhi Sarson
KBS 3, HPBS 1 and HPN 3, ONK 1, GSC 7 are the recommended
cultivars of Brown and Gobhi Sarson respectively. First fortnight of
October is the best time for the cultivation of these crops.
The seed rate of 6Kg/ha is required, and sowing should be done
with spacing of 30 cm line to line and 10 cm plant to plant. For
brown sarson, apply full does of SSP (250Kg), MOP (65 Kg),
Gipsum (140 Kg) along with 50% of Urea (65Kg) at the time
of sowing while remaing dose of Urea should be applied before
flowering. For Gobhi sarson, apply full does of SSP (375Kg), MOP
(65 Kg) and 50% dose of Urea (125Kg) during sowing time and
rest of Urea should be applied in two splits after 60 days and 80-90
days after sowing.
Two manual weeding are required between 40-70 days of sowing
for the management of weeds. Spray of Pendimethalin (Stomp 30
EC) @ 1.5 Kg /ha as a pre-emergence or Isoproturon @ 1Kg/ha
in 700-800 l of water as post emergence (30-35 days of sowing) is
recommended for the chemical method of weed management.
Aphid is the major pest associated with this crop, which can be
managed by the spray of methyl Demeton 25 EC or dimethoate 30
EC @ 1ml/L of water.
Winter vegetable
Cole Crops (cauliflower, cabbage, and broccoli)
Nursery sowing of cauliflower hybrids (Gibount, Fusiyama, Casper
RZ, Swati, Shweta, Bio pearl white) in August-September & July
-August (Mid group) and (Pahuja-71 & IAHS-9803) in October-
November & September (Late group) in low & Mid hills and April-
May (Late group) in high hills of HP for healthy seedlings on raised
17
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
beds or poly trays or under protected structure.
Nursery sowing of Cabbage hybrids (Pusa cabbage hybrid 1,
Pusa cabbage hybrid-81, Varun, Pushkar) should be completed
in August–September in low and mid hills for healthy seedlings
on raised beds or poly trays or under protected structure, while
transplanting should be completed from October – January.
Nursery sowing of Broccoli varieties/ hybrids (Palam Samridhi,
Palam Haritika, Palam Kanchan, Palam Vachitra, KTS-I and
Punjab Broccoli-I.) should be completed in September to October
in low & Mid hills.
Apply FYM@ 200 -250 q per ha at the time of field preparation,
NPK @120-180: 75-80: 60-75 kg per ha. Full dose of phosphorus
and one-third of N and half of potassium should be applied at the
time of transplanting. Remaining part of N should be top dressed
at an interval of one month each while half of potassium is to be
applied along with N during second top dressing. Borex can be
added in the soil for the management of browning in cauliflower
First light irrigation should be given immediately after transplanting
of the seedlings and regular maintenance of optimum moisture is
essential during growth and curd development. The harvesting of
curds is to be done as soon as the curds attain prime maturity and
compactness
Harvesting of broccoli heads at correct time i.e., before the buds
open and when the bud clusters are compact
Damping off of seedlings is major problem in cole crops and for
its control applies Mancozeb 25 g + carbendazim 10 g per 10 litres
of water. Seed treatment with hot water (50 0C) and streptocycline
(1g/ 10 L water) for 30 minutes each is advised for protection
against black rot. In case of attack of aphids and cabbage butterfly,
malathion @ 1ml/ L can be applied. Cypermethin @1mlL can be
applied for protection against cut worms at early stage.
18
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Garden Pea
The sowing of important early pea varieties (Arkel, Palm Triloki,
GS-10, AS-10) should be completed in September- October in low
and mid hills & March- June in high hills.
The sowing of main season pea varieties viz., PB-89, Him Palam
Matar-1, AP-3, GS-10 should be completed in late October –
November in low and mid hills & October – Mid November in
high hills of HP.
Application of FYM@ 20 -30 tons, 20-50 kg nitrogen, 30- 60 kg
phosphorus and 30-60 kg potassium per ha should be applied at
the time of sowing based on fertility status of the soil.
First hoeing and earthing up should be completed after 2-3 weeks
of sowing and second at flower initiation for higher yield. Pre-
emergence application of Alachlor or Pendimethalin @ 3litres /ha
is recommended to check the weeds in the initial growth stages
Irrigations before flowering, during flowering and at pod formation
stages are necessary for quality pods and higher yield.
Picking of pods should be done either early in the morning or
late in the afternoon. Picking should not be done during mid-day
which deteriorates the quality of pea pod due to heat.
Powdery mildew is serious problem in peas which can be controlled
using karathane 0.5 ml or wettable sulphur 2.0 g or hexaconazole
0.5 ml per L of water. For protection against leaf miner and pod
borer lambda cyhalothrin 0.75 ml and malathion 2 ml per L of
water can be applied, respectively.
Onion and Garlic
Nursery sowing of onion varieties (Palam Lohit, Nasik Red,
Agrifound Dark Red) should be completed in mid-October – mid
November in low & mid hill and transplanting should be completed
in December- January (low & mid hill).
The recommended varieties of garlic are GHC-1, Agrifound
Parvati, Large Segmented and Solan Selection
19
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Apply FYM@ 200-300 q/ha, nitrogen @ 60-150 kg, phosphorus @
35-150 kg and potassium@ 25-120kg per hectare depending upon
the soil test, cultivar and growing season. Apply 50% nitrogen
and entire quantity of phosphorus and potash at the time of
transplanting or bulb sowing. Remaining half of the nitrogen is top
dressed 5-6 weeks after transplanting.
Onions are ready for dry bulb harvesting when the tops get dried
(or at neck fall stage) and bulbs are mature. Harvesting should be
completed in last week of May, which increases storage life of bulbs.
Root & Leafy Vegetables
Sowing of root vegetables (Radish, Carrot & Turnip) should be
completed in: August-September (Low hill), July – October (Mid
hill) and March- August (High hill).
The recommended varieties of Radish (Pusa Himani, Japanese
white, White Icicle & Early Menu White), Carrot (Nantes, Solan,
Rachna) and Turnip (Purple Top White Globe, Golden Ball,
Snowball) should be sown
Application of FYM @ 100 q/ha, nitrogen @ 50-90 kg, Phosphorus
@ 50-80kg & Potash 40-80Kg/ha. Full dose of FYM, P, K and half
of N should be applied at the time of sowing and remaining part
of N should be top-dressed in two equal instalments at an interval
of one month.
Sowing of leafy vegetables (Spinach, Beet leaf, fenugreek &
coriander) should be completed August-November & February
-March in low hill, July- October & February- April (Mid hill) and
March- June in high hill
The recommended varieties of Spinach are (Pusa Harit, Banerjee
Gaint), beat leaf (Virginia Savoy, Long Standing), Fenugreek (IC-
74, Palam Soumya, Kasuri Methi, Pusa Kasuri) and Coriander
(Mahak and local land races) should be planted.
20
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fruit crops
Apple
Prepare tree basins and apply recommended dose of FYM (100 kg/
plant), Nitrogen (1.5 kg Urea per tree basin), Phosphorous (SSP
2 kg per plant) and potash (MOP 1.7 kg per plant) for plants of
age more than 10 years. Complete dose of Potash and phosphorous
should be given at the Time of basin preparation along with FYM
during December- January.
Half dose of Nitrogen (750 g per tree) should be given 2-3 weeks
before flowering and remaining quantity (750 g per tree) should be
applied after one month.
The fallen leaves of apple should be collected and decomposed in a
compost pit or spray of 5% urea (10 kg in 200lt water) may be done
on orchard floor on fallen leaves to ensure fast decomposition of
infected leaves.
During winters (November- December), expose the root system
of infected trees and cut the infected portion and apply Bordeaux
paint / chaubatia paste for the control of White root rot.
Remove all dead, diseased braches at the time of pruning and apply
Bordeaux paint/ chaubatia paste or any other Copper fungicide-
based paint.
Scarify wounds near collar region and apply Bordeaux paint/
chaubatia paste or any other Copper fungicide-based paint during
winter season.
For the management of canker, scarify the diseased portion upto
healthy region and apply Bordeaux paint/ chaubatia paste or any
other Copper fungicide-based paint during winter season.
Apply a mixture of lime + copper sulphate + linseed oil (30kg lime+
500 gm copper sulphate + 500 ml linseed oil in 100 L water) on
stems upto a height of 2-3 ft from the ground level during October-
November for protection against sun burning.
21
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Spray Horticulture Mineral Oil (2%) (20ml/L water) for the control
of sanjose scale at green tip stage of apple bud.
Spray melathion 50 EC (1ml/L water) or oxy-demeton methyl
25 EC (1ml/L water) just after fruit set to kill crawlers and newly
settled stage.
Place Phorate Granules (25-30gm Thimet/Phorate 10G) or
carbofuran (70-80 gm Furadon 3G) at 5cm depth in rhizosphere
in April and October to control woolly apple aphid in non-fruiting
trees.
Drench with Chlorpyriphos 20 EC (4ml/L water) in collar region
during October-November using at least 5 L of pesticide emulsion
per tree in collar region for the control of woolly apple aphid. Spray
with Chlorpyriphos 20 EC (2ml/L water) or quinalphos 25 EC
(2ml/L water) in September- October to check aerial population of
woolly apple aphid.
For stem borer, clear the hole with flexible wire, insert cotton wick
soaked in petrol/ dimethoate 30 EC (1ml/L water) and plug the
hole with mud.
Drench the tree basin with Chlorpyriphos (5ml/L water) during
November- December for the control of root borer.
Three to four honeybee hives to be kept per hectare in apple
orchards for effective pollination during flowering period. Place
the beehives at 5-10 per bloom.
To check the deficiency of micronutrients, give a spray of
micronutrient mixture (2.5 gm/L).
For the management of scab/ powdery mildew give a spray of
dodine (1gm/L water) or fluxapyroxad + difenconazole (30ml/100
L water) at green tip stage.
Recommendations against Hail damage:
Spray 100 gm Carbendazim or 600 gm Mancozeb in 200 L of water
immediately after hail but within 24 hours.
22
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Spray 200 gm Boric acid + 500 gm Zinc sulphate + 250 gm Quick
lime in 200 L of water within 3-4 days of hailstorm.
After 10 to 12 days, a spray of micro-nutrients mixtures like
Agromin, Multiplex or Microvit @ 400 to 600 g per 200 L of water
should be given.
Stone fruits (Plum, Peach, Apricots, Nectarines)
Preparation of tree basins and application of recommended
dose of FYM (40kg/plant), Nitrogen (1 kg Urea per tree basin),
Phosphorous (SSP 1.5 kg per plant) and potash (MOP 1.2 kg per
plant) for plants of age more than 7 years. Complete dose of Potash
and phosphorous should be given at the Time of basin preparation
along with FYM during December- January.
Half dose of Nitrogen (500 gm per tree) should be given 2-3 weeks
before flowering and remaining quantity (500 gm per tree) should
be applied after one month.
For the management of leaf curl due to fungus, give a spray of
copper oxychloride (3gm/L) during dormant period (December-
January) and spray of carbendazim (1gm/L at pink bud stage.
For the management of leaf curl due to aphid, apply methyl-
demeton or dimethoate (1ml/L) at pink bud stage.
Apply Mashobra paste after scarifying the gum lesion during
dormancy.
Mango
Apply sticky bands or alkathene sheet around tree trunk (0.5 mt
above ground level) to prevent crawling of mealy bug nymphs/
adults. Apply clay paste at the end of alkathene sheet to plug the
entry points.
Remove diseased braches/ leaves/ inflorescence and spray with
potassium metabisulhite (120 gm/200 L water) in the month
of October and repeat in January for the control of mango
malformation.
23
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Give a spray of wettable sulphur (5gm/L)/karathane/carbendazim/
hexaconazole (1gm/L) at flowering and after fruit set.
Citrus
For control of bacterial canker, remove the dead portions and apply
copper oxychloride @ 3g/ L of water.
Animal Husbandry
Maintain hygiene in sheds to keep animals free from ectoparasites.
Spray insecticides like deltamethrin (@4ml/L of water) in the
premises if required. Insecticides like Deltamethrin, Amitraj
or Flumethrin can be used to treat the infested animals after
consultation with a veterinarian.
Vaccinate your animals against Foot and Mouth disease,
Hemorrhagic septicemia and black quarter. Vaccination is done
free of cost by Department of Animal Health and Breeding at
regular intervals.
Wash your hands and clean the udder of animal with antiseptic
solution before milking to prevent mastitis. Maintain hygiene
in animal sheds. Practice full hand milking. Regularly provide
Vitamin E and selenium fortified mineral mixture to dairy animals.
Feed mineral mixture to dairy animals @ 50g/animal/day to
build strong immunity, boost milk production and maintain
reproductive health.
Plant perennial grasses like Napier bajra hybrid, Setaria and Guinea
grass in waste lands or field bunds in the month of July-August or
February- March. These grasses provide nutritious green fodder
(16-20 quintals per Kanal) in 3-4 cuttings.
Silage provides nutritious alternative when there is scarcity of
fodder particularly in the months of October-December and April
–June and maintains the milk production. Prepare silage in Kharif
and Rabi season.
24
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Supplement the diet of dairy animals with Urea Molasses Mineral
blocks. These blocks are cheap source of energy, protein, and
minerals. Keep the block for licking (10-15 minutes) at the time of
milking in morning and evening.
Grow Azolla round the year as it is a nutritive and cheap organic
feed substitute for dairy cattle. It provides high quality protein
and micro minerals like selenium and zinc. Cost of feeding can
be reduced by including azolla in animal diet thus making dairy
farming more profitable.
Provide balanced concentrate ration @ 1 kg per 3 L of milk
production+ 1 kg for maintenance per day. Prepare balanced
concentrate ration by using 40% cereal, 30% oil cake, 27% wheat
bran, 2% mineral mixture and 1% salt.
25
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
PUNJAB
Wheat
Improved varieties
Timely Sown Irrigated Conditions: Unnat PBW 343, Unnat PBW
550, PBW 1 Zn, PBW 725, PBW 677, HD 3086, WH 1105, HD
2967, PBW 621, WHD 943 and PDW 291
Late Sown Irrigated Conditions: PBW 752 and PBW 658
Time of Sowing: First fortnight of November is the optimum
sowing time of wheat crop. However, sowing of long duration
varieties can be commenced from the fourth week of October.
Seed Rate: 45 kg per acre for Unnat PBW 550 and 40 kg for all
other varieties.
Seed Treatment
For Termite: In termite infested soil, treat the seed with
1 g Cruiser 70 WS (thiamethoxam) or 2 ml Neonix 20 FS
(imidacloprid+hexaconazole) or 4 ml Dursban/Ruban/Durmet 20
EC (chlorpyriphos) per kg seed and dry it in shade. Seed treated
with Neonix also control smuts of wheat.
For Loose Smut: Treat 40 kg seed with 13 ml Raxil Easy/Orius 6
FS (tebuconazole) by dissolving in 400 ml water or 120 g Vitavax
Power 75 WS (carboxin+tetramethyl thiurum disulphide)
Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended quantity of seed for
one acre with 500 g consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and
Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and one litre of water on pucca
floor.
Sowing Method and Spacing
Conventional Sowing: Sow wheat with a seed-cum-fertilizer drill
at a depth of 4-6 cm. A spacing of 15-20 cm between the rows gives
good yield.
26