ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-XI
KARNATAKA
Generic Advisory:
Deep plough of land after receipt of sufficient rains helps in
retention of rainwater and better percolation in the fields.
Compartment bunding may be practiced for better soil and water
conservation during NE monsoon.
Land levelling can be taken for improved efficiency of water and
other resources utilization besides uniform distribution of water
in the root zone.
Fertilizers are to be applied based on soil test results. For reclamation
of problematic soils like saline, soil apply Gypsum (3-7 t/ha) and
acid soil (lime 2.5-5 t/ha) can be used (otherwise decided based on
soil test report)
Immediately after the harvest of Kharif crops, incorporate crop
residues into the soil. Composting of agricultural residues using
suitable waste decomposer gives nutrient rich good quality
compost.
In deep black soils, farmers are advised to grow either sole crops
of Rabi Sorghum, Safflower and Chickpea or intercrops of Rabi
Sorghum + Chickpea / Chickpea + Safflower (4:2).
Farmers must adhere COVID guidelines while doing agricultural
operations. Use of mask and sanitizer during all operations is
essential.
Daily intake of fresh vegetables, leafy vegetables, egg, milk and milk
products, Vitamin C rich foods like amla, orange, lemon guava,
sprouted pulses and fermented foods with emphasis on homemade
foods will boost immunity among children to protect from Covid
3rd wave.
394
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
In the backyard of house, farmers can grow the winter vegetables
viz., cabbage, cauliflower, carrot, beetroot, peas, sweet potato,
pumpkin and fruits like muskmelon and watermelon. Daily
consumption of fruits and vegetables provide nutrition security to
the families.
Paddy:
After harvesting of kharif paddy crop, keep it for 2-3 days in open
field for sun drying.
Maintain grain moisture content of 12-14% for storage purpose.
Rabi paddy nursery can be initiated using recommended varieties
of paddy for each agro climatic zone in the state.
Paddy Neck Blast Disease: Lesions on the neck are greyish brown
and cause girdling, making the neck and panicle fall. Spray
Tebuconazole 50% and Trifloxystrobin 25% (Nativo 75 WP) @ 4
g/ 10 litres of water.
395
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Leaf roller in Paddy: On the damaged leaves observe for
transparent and longitudinal white streaks and tubular folded
leaves. Spray Flubendiamide 20 % WG@ 20 g / 100 Litre of water
or Flubendiamide 48 SC @ 8g/ 100 litre of water (While spraying
water should drain off from the field).
Ragi:
Suitable varieties for rabi season are Indaf-7 & 9, KMR-301 and
GPU-48. Use of Indaf-9 or KMR-301 variety for irrigated condition.
Seed treatment with Azospirillum @ 150 g.
Application of 3-4t of FYM, 20kg of nitrogen, 10kg of phosphorous
and 10kg potash per acre will increase yield in finger millet. Split
application of nitrogen, that is half of the dose during sowing and
another half of the quantity 6-7 weeks after sowing is recommended.
Maize:
Grow improved hybrid maize varieties viz., MAH-14-5, Hema and
Nithyashree
Spacing for maize may be maintained at 60 x 30 cm so that optimum
plant population can be maintained
396
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fertilizer application, NPK 60:30:15 kg/acre (Full dose P & K and
20 kg of N and 4 kg of ZnSo4 apply to the soil before sowing and
remaining 20 kg N at 3-4 weeks after sowing.
For weed control in maize, spray pre-emergent herbicide Atrazine
@ 1 kg ai/ac for sole crop 3 days after sowing.
For the management of fall army worm in maize, spray 0.4g
Emamectin benzoate 5 SG per liter of water should be done.
Red gram:
Spray Pulse magic (10 gm/lit) at fifty per cent flowering stage of the
crop and second spray after fifteen days of the first spray.
Leaf spot and flower dropping may be managed by spraying
carbendazim 1 gram + Pulse magic 10 gram per one litre water
Follow IPM practices to manage the pests.
397
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Black gram /Green gram
After harvest of paddy, based on availability of residual soil
moisture content go for sowing of black gram.
Black gram varieties: T-9, Rashmi, or any local varieties @ 8-10 kg
per acre. Green gram varieties: KKM-3 or any local varieties @ 6-8
kg per acre may be sown.
Sprinkler irrigation may be given as protective irrigation wherever
irrigation water facility is available.
Spray Pulse magic or pulse special (10 gm/lit) at fifty per cent
flowering stage of the crop and second spray at after fifteen days of
the first spray.
Chickpea:
Early sowing and seed priming with CaCl (2%) to be practiced for
2
inducing drought tolerance. Use of wilt resistant variety Jaki-9218
(25 kg / acre) in wilt endemic areas.
398
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To avoid dry root rot and wilt disease treat the seeds with
Trichiderma 8 gram per kg seeds. Use of bio-fertilizers (Rhizobium
seed treatment and PSB 500 g / ha).
Pre-emergence herbicide application of Pendimethalin 30 EC (3.25
lit/ha).
Grow sunflower seeds as live bird perches
Spray 2% urea during initial stage of flowering. After the crop
attains 35 to 40 days, nipping practice is recommended to increase
the yield.
Spraying of pulse magic (5gm/L of water) for more pods and pod
weight at flowering stage.
Use of traps & lures (10 Nos./acre) for the management of pod
borer menace. Growing of coriander (6:1) as trap crop for the
management of pod borer is recommended. Use chemical spinosad
0.25 ml/L of water for control pod borer.
Sorghum:
Seeds to be treated with Calcium Chloride to get uniform
emergence of seedlings and to induce drought tolerance.
Soil application of Trichoderma enriched FYM @ 1kg/ 100 kg FYM
before sowing
Spray Potassium Nitrate (KNO3) at 5 gm per lit of water after 30
and 60 days after sowing for increase the drought resistant for
higher yield.
Wheat:
Pre-emergence herbicide application of Pendimethalin 30 EC (3.25
lit/ha). After 30 days after sowing post emergence application of 20
gm Metsulfuron methyl 20 WDG.
At the time of sowing, soil application of Zinc Sulphate and Ferrous
Sulphate (8 kg/ac) mixed with 16 kg vermicompost after 10 days
shade dry and spray Zinc Sulphate @ 5 gm/lit at tasseling stage of
the crops.
399
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sunflower:
Sowing of border crop with jowar/bajra (5-7 rows), use of new
hybrids RSFH -1887, KBSH-42, KBSH-44 seeds @ 5 kg / ha, Seed
priming with CaCl2 (2%) for 6 hours.
Apply 36:36:25 kg NPK/ac @ ZnSo4 4 kg, Borax 6 kg + FYM 3
tonnes/ac.
Spray of Boron @ 0.5% at the time of flowering and follow hand
pollination, honeybee keeping and sprinkling of sesamum seeds
for better seed set.
Powdery disease can be controlled by spraying myclobutanil 0.5
gram or difenconzole 1 ml or hexaconoazole 1 ml per one litre
water spray.
Ground nut:
Seed treatment with bio-fertilizers (Rhizobium and PSB 500 g /
ha).
Application of Gypsum (200 kg/ac) at the time of sowing and
seed is treated with SAAF at 2 gm/kg of the seed to prevent any
infestation from soil borne diseases. Chlorpyriphos is used @ 10
ml/kg of seed to prevent the seed damage from soil insects at initial
stages.
Pre-emergence herbicide application of Pendimethalin 30 EC (3.25
lit/ha) for initial weed management.
Cotton:
Bt. Cotton seeds@450gms per acre, seed treatment with Zinc
Sulphate, Ferrous Sulphate, Magnesium sulphate and Manganese
sulphate (4 gm/kg of seed) may be followed.
Yellow sticky traps @10 per acre, Spray of systemic insecticides
(need based)
For management of leaf reddening, spray Magnesium sulphate
(1%) with 1 per cent 19:19:19 (water soluble) fertilizer at 100-110
days after sowing.
400
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Alternative furrow irrigation in drought condition may be adopted.
For cotton alternaria leaf spot and leaf blight spray Mancozeb 2 g/
lit.
Sugarcane:
Use variety CO-86032 & intercrop with onion.
Soil application of Azospirillum @ 10 kg / ha, PSB @ 10 kg /ha, Sett
treatment (Carbendazim @ 100gm + Chloropyriphis @ 100ml +
Urea @ 100 gm/100 litr).
Use of pre-emergent weedicide Atrazine @ 1.6 kg/ha and post-
emergent weedicide 2-4-D @ 2.5 kg/ha for weed management.
Incorporation of straw.
Tying & staking.
Mulberry:
White powdery patches appear on the lower surface of the
leaves. The corresponding portions on the upper surface develop
Chlorotic lesions, the leaves become yellow, coarse and loss their
nutritive value. Spray wettable sulphur 50WP 2g/liter of water or
Carbendazim @ 2g/liter of water. Safety period is 15 days.
To manage Leaf Roller in mulberry, release Trichoderma chilonis
egg parasitoids from 5th day after chemical spray @ 5 Trichocard
per acre.
Foliar spray of a multi mineral mixture Seriboost @ 2.5ml/liter of
water.
Dusting of lime every alternative day on silkworm @ 5g/square feet
to manage Muscardine disease in silkworm.
Tying of yellow sticky trap along with pheromone lure on every
window inside and outside the rearing house to mitigate the Uzi fly
infestation in Silkworm rearing.
401
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Onion:
Bhima Dark Red, Bhima Shakti, Bhima Kiran, Bhima Light Red,
Arka Nikitha, Arka Pragati, Arka Kirthiman, Arka Lalima and
Arka Bheem are the red onions and Bhima Shubra, Bhima Shweta
and Bhima Safed are the white onions varieties recommended for
cultivation in rabi season.
About 5-7 kg seeds are required to raise seedlings for one hectare.
Application of pre-emergence herbicide pendimethalin @ 0.2% is
recommended to control weeds in nursery.
Seed treatment with thiram @ 2 g/kg of seed to avoid damage
from damping off disease. Foliar spray of benomyl @ 0.2% is
recommended to control soil borne diseases in the nursery.
When the severity of thrips infestation is high, foliar application
of Fipronil, or profenopos @ 0.1% is recommended. Seedlings are
available for transplanting in 40-45 days after sowing (DAS) for
Rabi season.
For drip irrigation, the distance between two inbuilt emitters
should be around 30-50 cm and the discharge flow rate should be
4 l/hr. For sprinkler, the distance between two laterals (20 mm) of
micro sprinkler should be 6 m and with a discharge rate of 135 l/hr.
Application of fertilizers @ NPK 40:40:60 kg /ha as basal and
the remaining 70 kg N in seven splits through drip irrigation is
recommended for achieving higher marketable bulb yield. Split
doses should be applied at weekly interval from transplanting to
60 DAT
Application of 0.2% Oxyflurofen 23.5 % EC before planting + one
hand weeding at 40-60 days after transplanting is recommended
for marketable bulb yield and weed control efficiency (65-80%).
Combined application of 110:40:60:20 kg NPKS along with organic
manures equivalent to 15 t FYM and Azospirillum and Phosphorus
solubilizing bacteria @ 5 kg each/ha.
402
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Spray fungicides and pesticide in combination for effective
management of thrips and purple blotch incidence. Spray Schedule
includes Mancozeb @ 0.25% with Methomyl @ 0.8 g/l at 30 days
after transplanting, Tricyclazole @ 0.1% with Carbosulphan @ 2
ml/l at 45 days after transplanting, Hexaconazole @ 0.1% with
profenofos @ 1 ml/l at 60 days after transplanting.
While taking onion seed production, farmers are advised to follow
isolation distance of 500 to 1000 meters from different onion
varietal plots to maintain seed purity. Bulbs should be treated with
Carbendazim 50 WP @ 1gm./lit before planting. It is recommended
to install 2 honeybee colonies for higher seed yield
Chilli:
After the harvest of red chilli, dry the harvested produce on
concrete platforms or tarpaulin or polythene sheets for 8 to 10 days
to avoid aflotaxin and get dirt free good quality produce.
403
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seedling root dipping in Trichoderma harzianum (1kg in 7 litr
water) and drenching of carbendazim 2g/lit is recommended.
Application of FYM enriched with Trichoderma or Arka Microbial
Consortium, Seed treatment with seedpro @ 4g/kg and raising of
seedlings under 40 mesh nylon net cover.
Application of RDF: Rainfed NPK 100-50-50 Kg/ha and Irrigated
NPK 150-75-75 kg/ha.
For both irrigated and rainfed, spray vegetable special (5g/lit) at 30,
60 and 90 DAP
Spray 1gm/lit carbendazim or 3g/lit wettable sulphur at 2 sprays @
15 days interval
Growing 1 row of marigold for every 8 rows of chilli as trap crop.
Growing of 2 rows of maize as border crop, use aluminium surfaced
reflective agri-mulch for repelling insect vectors and errect yellow
sticky traps for pest management.
Spray insecticide in rotation of Acephate 75WP @ 1.5g/lit, Fipronil
5% SC @ 1ml/lit, Imidachloprid 70 WG @ 2g/15lit in combination
with neem oil 2ml/lit & sagarika 2.5 ml/lit at 7 to 10 days interval
until flowering and fruit formation
Watermelon
Following modern methods of cultivation like use of seedlings
against direct sowing, mulching, drip, and fertigation and use of
vegetable special (1g/lit) during fruit development stage
Vector control by planting maize/sorghum as barrier crop. Spray
acephate 1g/lit or imidachloprid 17.8 SL @ 0.25ml/lit
Retention of only 2 shoots per vine and retention of 2 fruits per
vine only after 11th node
Use yellow sticky traps (25 traps/ ha), spray neem oil 4ml/litr and
imidachloprid 17.8 SL @ 0.25ml/lit as per the need.
404
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Vegetable crops:
Go for sowing of Cruciferae Family vegetables like Cauliflower,
Cabbage, Knol-Khol, etc. and vegetable crops like Bhendi, Brinjal,
Ridgeguard, Leafy vegetables, Guards, and other vegetables suitable
for Rabi season.
Spray Ginger Rich for ginger crop 5g/lit of water @ 45 days interval,
starting from 5th month to 8th month old crop.
Brinjal:
Seedling root dip in Azospirrillum and PSB solution (1kg in 7 litr
water) and Applications of VAM to nursery seedlings.
Application of 25 t/ha FYM and RDF, NPK 125-100-50 kg/ha,
Spray Vegetable special (5g/lit) at 30, 60 and 90 DAP.
Crop rotation with non solanaceous crops like Maize and Jowar
and Drench Bleaching powder 15kg/ha before transplanting.
Spray NAA (Planofix) 50 ppm
Use of yellow & blue sticky traps @ 25-30/ha, Spray of Imidachloprid
0.5 ml/litr or Fipronil 1ml/litr at 6, 9 and 11 weeks after sowing.
Before fruiting take up 2-3 spray of Melathion 50 EC @ 2 ml/lit.,
Tomato:
Use disease resistant hybrid Arka Rakshak & Arka Samrat, Crop
rotation with non solanaceous crops, Drench the plants with
streptocyclin (1g) +COC (3g) per lit.
Grow marigold as a trap crop for nematode, Apply neem cake
during planting in the main field.
Seedling root dip in Rhizobium and PSB solution (1kg in 7 litr
water) and Applications of VAM to nursery seedlings.
Application of RDF NPK 250-250-250 Kg/ha for hybrids and 115-
100-60 Kg/ha for others.
405
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Foliar application of Arka Vegetable special (@ 5 gm / litre) (1st-25
to 30 DAT, subsequent sprays interval of 20-25 days after 1st spray)
is directly contributing in yield increase by 20-30 %.
Control sucking pest by use of yellow sticky traps @ 25-30/ha,
Spray of Neem oil 4ml/lit or Imidachloprid 0.5 ml/litr or Fipronil
1ml/litr at 6,9 and 11 weeks after sowing
Spray 1gm/lit carbendazim or 3g/lit wettable sulphur at 2 sprays @
15 days interval.
Marigold or cucumber is commonly used as trap crop for every 15
rows of the main crop to attract tomato fruit borer.
To control fruit borer, and leaf miner are major pest observed in
the tomato crop. To control these pests, spray HaNPV 100 LE/acre
and Neem insecticide 3-5 ml/ltr. of water respectively.
Wilting, to control drench with copper oxycloride @ 3 g +
Streptocyclin @ 0.5 g/litre of water.
Marigold:
Introduction of compact flower hybrids Arka Bangara and Arka
Agni
Use cuttings for planting
Application RDF 125-60-60 KG/ha and during pinching apply 100
kg/ha nitrogen
Spray Hexaconazole @ 1 ml/lit or Mancozeb @ 2g/lit
Tuberose:
Introduction of single floret flower hybrids Sringar and Prajwal
Application RDF 100-50-50 KG/ha
Spray Thiurea @ 1000 ppm
Spray Hexaconazole @ 1 ml/lit or Mancozeb @ 2g/lit
406
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Mango:
In the month of October and November during pre-flowering
stage of Mango, the growers are advised to take 2 sprays of Mango
Special @ 5 gm/lit along with adjuvants and lime juice to get quality
fruits in terms of fruit appearance, keeping quality and taste.
Pruning of densely grown and disease infected branches along with
1or 2 branches at the top of canopy in the month of July-August
will increase penetration of light in turn yield in mango.
For regulating flowering in mango trees apply paclobutrazol (4-5
ml/tree) in trenches.
To manage die back disease, prune the dead woods and spray CoC
at 3 g/l twice at 15 days interval.
Cashew:
During new flush emergence in Cashew crop, farmers are advised
to take up prophylactic spray of Lambda Cyhalothrin 2.5 EC @ 0.5
ml/lit for management of T-Mosquito bug.
For more than 5 years Cashew plantation, make small trenches 4
feet away from the trunk of Cashew plant & apply 1kg Urea, 600-
gram Rock Phosphate, 200 gram of Muriate of Potash per tree.
20kg of FYM should be given along with inorganic fertilizer.
Coconut and Arecanut plantations:
Based on age of crop and soil type, provide 15-20 liter of water per
plant through drip irrigation.
Practice mulching of farm wastes to retain soil moisture content, to
avoid evaporation loss and also to control weed growth.
Drill a small hole where redpalm weevil is observed and apply
Chloropyrifos @ 2ml/litre of water and close the hole with clay soil.
For control of inflorescence die back spray with Mancozeb @
3gram / litre of water and Chloropyriphos @ 2ml per litre of water.
407
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Black pepper:
Spraying of KNO3 to maintain quality of pepper berries. Protective
irrigation may be given during moisture stress, mulch with crop
residues to maintain moisture.
Drench Arka Microbial Consortium (AMC) (drench 3-5 litre/
vine) after mixing 4kg AMC with 1kg of Jaggery in 200 litres of
water for healthy crop.
Remove and destroy disease infected vines to stop further spread
of the disease.
Spray and drench Potassium Phosphonate 3ml/litre against quick
wilt disease during rain break.
Spray Black Pepper special (micronutrient mixture) @ 5 gm per lit
during September - October month to increase the yield.
Spray Potassium Nitrate 5.0 gm in one lit of water to increase the
berry size during Sept-Oct month.
Provide adequate shade and mulch to the vines in the post monsoon
season.
Spray lime or kaolin @ 2 kg and 1 kg in 100 litres of water,
respectively to avoid direct sunlight and moisture stress (in the
month of February)
Coffee:
Mulch with crop residues to conserve moisture & give protective
irrigation during moisture stress.
Cleaning/weeding can be carried out in the coffee plantation before
harvesting.
For management of stem borer and berry borer infestation, spot
spray with Chlorpyrifos @ 2ml/liter and erect Broca traps 25 no.
per acre and yellow sticky traps
For management of root rot disease, remove infected plants and
drench surrounding plants with Propiconazole 2.0 ml per lit.
408
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Ginger:
Remove rhizome rot infected plants and apply lime and bleaching
powder
Spray and drench rhizome rot infected bed with Metalaxyl +
Mancozeb @ 2gm/litre
Drench Copper Oxychloride (COC) 3gm/litre for healthy bed to
avoid spread of the disease
Spray Ginger special 5 gm per lit during September-October to get
better and quality
Banana:
For natural (chemical free) ripening in banana adopt the technology
developed by IIHR-Bangaluru.
For banana plants planted in November and December 2021, start
spraying of IIHR Banana Special @ 5 g/lt. with 1 shampoo sachet at
monthly interval upto September 2021.
409
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Remove unwanted suckers from the rhizome to maintain normal
bunch weight and quality.
For management of sigatoka leaf spot spray Propiconazole 1 ml/L
Livestock Advisories during Rabi season:
Maximum cattle and buffaloes show oestrus symptoms in winter
season. Farmers should identify oestrus signs viz., bellowing,
mounting on other animals, cervical discharge, anorexia, reduction
in milk yield and do Artificial insemination / Natural mounting
accordingly.
Too cold climate causes pneumonia to all livestock especially young
ones. So, provide proper ventilation, more floor space/animal and
avoid overcrowding in dairy/sheep/goat/poultry sheds.
To prevent the outbreak of Lumpy Skin Viral Disease (LSD) in
cattle (Oct-Nov month), mass vaccination with Goat Pox vaccine
against LSD in endemic areas should be carried out.
Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) is a vector borne disease. So, all farmers
should protect their livestock against vectors viz., mosquito, house
fly and ticks by using mosquito nets, mosquito fly repellents and
washing of animals with ectoparasiticidal drugs. Also, famers
should practice burning of dry neem leaves especially in morning
and evening hours to reduce mosquito bite to livestock.
All cattle & buffaloes should be vaccinated against Foot & Mouth
Viral disease (FMD) in all villages. Vaccination should be 100% to
eradicate FMD viral disease from our country.
Livestock farmers should take up cultivation of improved varieties
of lucerne and fodder oats during the month of October and
November
All sheep and goats especially young ones from 3 months to 1 year
of age should be vaccinated against PPR viral disease.
Sanitize the cattle shed with sodium hypochlorite solution before
milking.
410
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Wash the milch animals’ udder and teats with potassium
permanganate solution before milking.
All livestock should be treated with appropriate deworming
medicines by consulting KVK animal scientist /local veterinary
doctor.
Poultry birds should be given clean and cold water for drinking
throughout the day.
All back yard poultry birds compulsorily should be vaccinated
against Ranikhet Disease.
411
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
KeRALA
Rice
In wet direct seeded paddy fields, land preparation may be done
immediately after the harvest of the first crop. Addition of soil
ameliorants, preferably lime or dolomite @ 2 kg/ cent as initial split
should be made mandatory along with first ploughing.
During the next ploughing, after two weeks, add FYM @ 2 t/acre
which will restore the productivity of rice-based cropping system.
In Rice- Rice- pulse systems, incorporate crop residues into the soil
during first ploughing so that FYM can be reduced to 50 % of the
above dosage.
Farmers should ensure selection of good quality seeds by soaking in
salt solution for 10 minutes. The ones that float must be discarded.
Seeds should be immediately washed after removing from solution
and then used for sowing.
Plough the field thoroughly and ensure proper levelling as this is
critical for effective water and weed management.
Wherever the land preparation has been done for second crop of
paddy (mundakan), transplanting can be done. As a prophylactic
measure, the seeds may be soaked in a solution of Pseudomonas
culture (10 grams for 1 kg seeds) to control sheath blight, sheath
rot, leaf spot disease etc. The seedlings can be soaked for 30 minutes
in pseudomonas solution (20-gram Pseudomonas in one litre of
water). The micronutrient deficiency of paddy can be managed by
spraying 5 gram of paddy sampoorna in one litre of water.
Apply full doze of P, half the dose of N and half dose of Potash i.e.,
90 kg Factomphos and 14.4 kg Potash/ acre as a basal dose.
If there is toxicity of iron in the rice field, apply 150 kg lime per
acre.
In Kuttanad and Onattukara regions, soil testing must be adopted
for site specific nutrient management (application of fertilizers
412