ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
KeRALA
Rice
In wet direct seeded paddy fields, land preparation may be done
immediately after the harvest of the first crop. Addition of soil
ameliorants, preferably lime or dolomite @ 2 kg/ cent as initial split
should be made mandatory along with first ploughing.
During the next ploughing, after two weeks, add FYM @ 2 t/acre
which will restore the productivity of rice-based cropping system.
In Rice- Rice- pulse systems, incorporate crop residues into the soil
during first ploughing so that FYM can be reduced to 50 % of the
above dosage.
Farmers should ensure selection of good quality seeds by soaking in
salt solution for 10 minutes. The ones that float must be discarded.
Seeds should be immediately washed after removing from solution
and then used for sowing.
Plough the field thoroughly and ensure proper levelling as this is
critical for effective water and weed management.
Wherever the land preparation has been done for second crop of
paddy (mundakan), transplanting can be done. As a prophylactic
measure, the seeds may be soaked in a solution of Pseudomonas
culture (10 grams for 1 kg seeds) to control sheath blight, sheath
rot, leaf spot disease etc. The seedlings can be soaked for 30 minutes
in pseudomonas solution (20-gram Pseudomonas in one litre of
water). The micronutrient deficiency of paddy can be managed by
spraying 5 gram of paddy sampoorna in one litre of water.
Apply full doze of P, half the dose of N and half dose of Potash i.e.,
90 kg Factomphos and 14.4 kg Potash/ acre as a basal dose.
If there is toxicity of iron in the rice field, apply 150 kg lime per
acre.
In Kuttanad and Onattukara regions, soil testing must be adopted
for site specific nutrient management (application of fertilizers
412
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
and quality dolomite as liming material) to improve nutrient use
efficiency.
Pest and Disease management
Tricho cards for managing rice stem borer and leaf folder can be
used @ 2cc card per acre at 15,30,45 and 60 days after sowing.
Rice case worm: To control this 25 kg sawdust or rice husk ash
mixed with one litre kerosene (for 1 acre) can be spread after
draining the field.
Leaf folder: It can be controlled by using Trichogramma cards (2CC
per one acre). Cut the cards in to small pieces and fix in different
regions of the field. If the attack is severe, spray quinalphos @ 2ml
per one liter of water.
Army worm: To control, complete flooding of field for 24 hours,
wherever possible. Spraying of chlorantraniliprole @ 3 ml per ten
413
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
litre of water in the field, bunds, and weeds. Where transplanting is
not yet undertaken, apply chlorantraniliprole granules @ 4 kg per
one acre along with basal dose of fertilizers. Keep the field bunds
and surroundings weed free.
Brown Plant Hopper (BPH): Spray 2 g Thiamethoxam per ten
litres of water.
Bacterial Leaf blight- To control the spread of Bacterial Leaf blight
in paddy, spray 6 g of Streptocycline in 30 litres of water.
Sheath Blight- To control sheath blight disease in rice, spray 4-gram
Trifloxystrobin +Tebuconazole in 10 litre of water.
Coconut
The green manure crops should be ploughed in and incorporated
into the soil during August-September. This will increase the water
holding capacity of soil.
For laterite, sandy and red sandy loam soils, give two ploughings
or diggings in September-October and one raking in January. In
areas where surface run off is more, form mounds in September-
October and level them in November-December.
Mulching is an effective method of conserving soil moisture. Mulch
the coconut basins with green / dry leaves at the close of northeast
monsoon (October-November).
While applying second dose of fertilizers to coconut palms, apply
550-gram urea, 700-gram Rajphos and 800-gram potash under
irrigated conditions and apply 500-gram urea, 800-gram Rajphos
and one kg potash under rainfed conditions. Alternatively, apply 4
kg coconut mixture (10:5:20) per adult palm in a band radius of 5-6
feet from the trunk.
Use of borax @100g/palm is advised to reduce button shedding, if
noticed.
Inter cropping with banana and Colocasia can be done in coconut
gardens. This is for ensuring more aeration and retention of
moisture.
414
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Irrigating coconut palms will prevent stunted growth, drooping of
leaves and immature nut fall during long rainless period.
Red palm weevil: Coconut log traps with fermenting toddy or
pineapple activated with yeast or molasses can be set in coconut
gardens to trap the free-floating population of red palm weevil. Use
insecticide to each trap to kill the weevil trapped.
Rhinoceros beetle: To control attack of Rhinoceros beetle,
application of 250 g neem cake or marotti (Hydnocarpus wightina)
cake mixed with equal volume of sand in the innermost 2-3 leaf
axils. This treatment is to be done twice, ie., during September-
October after the south-west monsoon.
Whiteflies: Spray neem oil @5ml per one litre along with soap @
10gm per one litre on the lower surface of leaves to reduce the
incidence of whiteflies in coconut.
To manage leaf rot disease, remove the spindle leaf and apply
Hexaconazole 5EC (2ml in 300 ml water) and fill the topmost
three leaf axils around the spindle with 250gm sand and neem cake
mixture.
Bud rot: Spray 1 % Bordeaux mixture on spindle leaves and crown
of bud rot disease affected palms as well as neighbouring palms, as
a prophylactic measure.
Banana
For kharif season planted banana, final foliar spray of the multi
nutrient mix, banana sampoorna must be carried out after the full
emergence of bunch, to avoid nutrient deficiencies.
For the rabi season banana, select good quality sword suckers of
2-3 months’ age and plant in pits of 50 x50 x 50 cm dimension.
Apply 10 kg organic manure and at least 500 g good quality
dolomite at the time of planting. For TC banana plantlets, 15 kg
organic manure has to be applied.
The rhizomes are to be smeared with cow dung solution & ash then
they are dried in the sun for about 3 to 4 days before planting.
415
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Propping can be followed to reduce the damage due to high wind
speed.
Apply lime @ 250g/plant to rectify the calcium deficiency in the
soil. Boron deficiency is seen during dry weather. Hence, spray 5
grams of sampoorna in one litre of water.
Adjust the time of planting to avoid high temperature and drought
at the time of emergence of bunches (7-8 months after planting).
Ensure good drainage and prevent water logging.
Spodoptera-There is a chance of attack of spodoptera in banana.
Destroy the affected leaves along with the spodoptera.
Rhizome Weevil- There is a chance of Rhizome Weevil attack in
banana. As a precaution, apply 250-gram neem cake per pit.
Nematode: There is a chance of nematode attack in banana. The
symptoms start as black spots on roots and finally result in root
decay and falling of plants. To control this, pare the rhizomes and
apply neem cake @ 1 kg/plant at the time of planting. For managing
nematodes paring+ banana sucker treatment with Bacillus
macerans/ Paecilomyces lilacinus @ 5g/sucker + pit application
@10g/pit 45 days after planting can be recommended.
Pseudostem weevil: As a prophylactic measure against pseudostem
weevil, remove the dry outer sheaths of the pseudostem of all
infested and un-infested plants in the endemic areas and spray
any of the recommended insecticides. Drenching all the leaf axils,
rhizome, and surrounding soil and all-round the entire pseudostem
inserting the nozzle through the bore holes made by the larvae, if
any and also within the outer sheathes by slightly raising the same
at different spots is also effective. Apply quinalphos 0.05 per cent
or chlorpyrifos 0.03 per cent. Repeat the treatment after 3 weeks if
the infestation persists.
Sigatoka disease: To control sigatoka disease in banana, cut and
remove the severely affected leaves and spray 1 % Bordeaux mixture
with sticker soon after the appearance of the initial symptoms of
416
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
the disease.
Panama wilt: There is a chance of panama wilt in banana varieties
like poovan, kadali etc. Drench the soil with one gram of
carbendazim in one litre of water.
Black Pepper
Mulching to de done using dried leaves in existing Pepper Garden.
Shade to be provided using coconut leaves to pepper vines planted
last year. Irrigate vines twice in a week. Spray Pepper Powr Mix @5
g/litre or 19:19:19 @ 5 g per lit in vines bearing pepper and if the
spikes bear berries of uneven size foliar application of boron @ 2 g
per litre is beneficial.
Spraying Bordeaux mixture 1 % and drench copper oxy chloride
4g/litre at monthly intervals prevents phytophthora infections in
pepper
Flea beetle: Spray any one of the following insecticides namely,
dimethoate or quinalphos at 0.05 per cent concentration. The
second spraying is to be given at the time of berry formation
(September-October) and once again at berry maturing stage, if
needed.
417
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Ginger and Turmeric
Mulch the crop with glyricidia and earthing up to be done after last
application of fertilizer dose in month of October
Foliar spray of the multinutrient mix @ 5g/l, is advised to rectify
nutrient deficiencies, if noticed for turmeric and ginger.
As a prophylactic measure against rhizome rot disease, drenching
of either mancozeb 0.3 per cent solution or pseudomonas @20g/l
can be done in the field.
Cardamom
Forking- It is necessary in hard soils, which is to be carried out in
October-November.
Harvesting: Peak period of harvest is from August - October.
Farmers should be vigilant about Azhukal Disease. Keep the field
weed free and rake the inter spaces and irrigation.
418
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
It is advised to give a heavy irrigation once in a fortnight from
February depends on the rainfall. Destroy the katte disease affected
plants.
Vegetables
All types of vegetables including cool season vegetables (Nov –
Feb) can be grown in open conditions as well as in grow bags.
For open conditions, apply 3 kg dolomite/cent during land
preparation to manage soil acidity. For grow bag vegetable
cultivation, while filling the grow bags with 1:1:1 mixture of
topsoil, cow dung/compost, and coir pith, apply 50 g of dolomite.
Addition of Pseudomonas culture to the soil at the time of planting
of vegetables will help to reduce incidence of fungal diseases.
Foliar spray of the multi-nutrient mix, vegetable sampoorna is
advised to rectify nutrient deficiencies, if noticed.
419
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Pest and Diseases management
Aphids: There is a chance of aphids in cowpea. Apply 2% neemoil
emulsion or apply 20 g Verticillium lecanii per one litre of water in
10 days intervals. If aphid attack is severe, apply 3 ml Imidacloprid
or 2 g Thiamethoxam per ten litres of water.
White fly: Apply 2% neem oil garlic emulsion or spray 20g
Lecanicillium lecanii per one litre of water in ten days intervals to
control the attack of white fly in chilli, brinjal and tomato.
Thrips: There is a chance of thrips attack in chilli. Apply 2% neem
oil garlic emulsion or spray 2 g Thiamethoxam per ten litres of
water.
Spodoptera: If the attack is in the initial stage, the affected leaves
of cabbage and cauliflower, should be destroyed along with egg,
caterpillar, and pupa. Neem Kernel suspension (5 percentage)
should be sprayed. If the attack is severe, spray Flubendamide
(Tukumi) 2 ml per ten litre of water or Chlorantraniliprole
(Coragen) 3 ml per ten litres of water.
Fruit borer: To control fruit borer in cowpea, apply 5% Neem
Kernel Suspension to control fruit borer in the initial stage. Spray
Flubendamide 2 ml per10 litre of water or Chlorantraniliprole 3 ml
per10 litre if the attack is severe.
Green leaf hopper: There is a chance of green leaf hopper attack in
bhindi. Spray 2 g thiamethoxam per ten litres of water.
Jassid: Due to increase in atmospheric temperature, Jassid attack
may be increased. They can be controlled by applying 2% neem oil
emulsion once in a week or by spraying Lecanicillium lecanii at 20
g per litre of water.
Anthracnose disease: During rainy season, there is a chance of
Anthracnose disease in Cowpea. As a prophylactic measure, apply
1% Bordeaux mixture or spray copper oxychloride 3 gram per one
litre of water.
420
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Downy mildew: Due to high relative humidity, there is a chance of
downy mildew attack in bitter gourd. As a prophylactic measure,
spray pseudomonas solution (20 g per one litre) under the leaves.
Rubber
Make fire belt around rubber plantation to avoid fire accident.
In tapping panels spray Indofil M45 4g/ litre against fungal diseases
In rubber protect young leaves of budded seedlings from shedding
due to fungal diseases spray a solution of copper oxy chloride 4g in
1 litre of water.
Bee keeping
Those who start beekeeping for the first time can procure bee
colonies and begin the apiary during October-November
Established beekeepers can prepare their colonies for division.
Regular inspection of bee colonies is needed to avoid colony
absconding and manage pests and diseases.
Biowaste management
EM solution or any composting inoculum can be used for
composting of farm and home based biowastes in a low cost and
effective manner.
Animal Husbandry
Ensure the availability of green fodder to the animal daily. Provide
mineral and vitamin mixture in prescribed quantity daily.
Mix 30g sodium bicarbonate and 1-teaspoon yeast in the feed daily
to avoid digestive disorders associated with excessive acidity.
Animal should not be allowed to graze in open grazing lands to
avoid lightening risk.
Vaccinate animals against foot & mouth disease and haemorrhagic
septicaemia
421
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Take precautions to avoid ecto parasitic infestation. If fever,
shivering, brown coloured urine, off feed etc. are noticed, consult
veterinary doctor immediately
Assure increased ventilation in the shed.
Control biting flies in livestock with external application of
‘Poovathenna’ (Kusum oil) once in three days and prevent the
outbreak of vector borne disease, especially Lumpy Skin Disease.
422
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
LAKsHAdweeP IsLANds
Specific Agro Advisories for coming rabi season
Generic Advisory:
Predominantly the islanders grow vegetables/fruits during this
period. The pre-rabi advisory for farmers is to prepare land for
vegetables and fruit cultivation. Farmers ready for cultivation of
vegetable and fruits have to be think about conservation of available
water. Conserve water in surface and sub-surface horizons of soil
which in turn address drought related issues in coconut and other
crops grown in the island. Use natural mulching (locally available
farm materials) for conversation of moisture.
Homestead gardens:
Drought management in homesteads should be undertaken
through husk burial in trenches, mulch with dried coconut leaves,
sow cowpea or green manure crops on receipt of NE- monsoon
showers in coconut basins.
Manage the microclimate with intercrops like tubers, vegetables,
perennial vegetables, medicinal plants, spices, and banana to make
each homestead as nutritional garden.
Vegetables:
Planting material production of vegetables can be initiated. Use
grow bag, soil less medium and organic inputs for vegetable
cultivation. Use drip or wick irrigation sources for assuring wetness
for better growth of plants. Use soil less medium @ 5kg/bag.
Farmers interested in vegetable cultivation can start seedling
production through nursery method. Farmers should use good
quality seeds in warm and protected place by using seedling trays
or seed beds with fertile soil enriched with FYM or compost.
423