ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
LAdAKH
Vegetable
No crop is possible in open field conditions in winters in Ladakh
UT. Therefore, crops should be grown under protected structures
like 3-side walled greenhouses, trenches, and hi-tech greenhouses.
Vegetable and their varieties to be grown during Rabi season:
Chinese cabbage-Springsun-60, Palampur green, Tropic Prince
Cabbage- KGMR-1, Mitra
Broccoli- Green Magic, Lucky
Spinach- Banejee Giant, Silver beat/Beet Leaf, Shalimar green,
Virginia Savoy
Swiss Chard-CITH-Red, CITH Green
Methi- IC-74, Kasuri, Pusa Early Bunching
Coriander-Shalimar Dhania-1, Surabhi
Turnip- PTWG
Lettuce-Chinese Yellow, Simpson Black seeded, Grishma
KnolKhol- White Vienna, early white vienna
Celery-Ford Hook Emperor
Kale- Khanyari, HaeznHawk
Radish-Japanese white
Carrot- Early Nantes
Nursery of Cole crops, lettuce and Chinese cabbage should be
sown in first fortnight of September
Vermi compost should be added before sowing/transplanting @5t/
ha for leafy vegetable and 7t/ha for cole crops
Cabbage andbroccoli should be completed in first fortnight of
October at a spacing of 45x30 cm.
68
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Spinach and Swiss Chardand other leafy vegetables should be sown
at a spacing of 30x30 cm.
Radish and carrot should be sown on bunds.
Chinese cabbage should be transplanted at a spacing of 30x30 cm.
Knol Khol can be transplanted in September- November to get
crop throughout the winters.
Spinach and Swiss chard should be directly sown before October to
get maximum yield throughout the winters.
Irrigation is required at an interval of 15-30 days during winter
As the irrigation sources are frozen in winter, keep provision of
water Tank inside the greenhouse for irrigation purpose
Black mulching under the greenhouse/trenches will give excellent
yield
Agricultural Engineering
Bore well may be employed to cater large area under greenhouses.
For maintaining temperature in peak winter, Earth Tube Heat
Exchanger facility may be employed in the green houses. Otherwise
in area like Changthang, greenhouse polythene may be covered
under blankets or can use triple layer polycarbonate as covering
material during nighttime to maintain heat loss
Agro-forestry
Autumn plantation of willow may be carried out after leaf fall and
in the month of November.
Cutting height should not be kept 2 m.
Irrigate plant immediately after planting and then 15 days after.
Fruit Science
Orchard sanitation by cleaning and removing dry leaves, clothes,
rotten fruits etc from canal and basin of trees and dispose it with
covering 1/ mtr soil or by crushing or burying in doubling plastic
2
bag.
69
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Management of canopy architecture by pruning trees that are more
than four-year-old if not pruned earlier.
The plants trees which are 1-3 years should be trained to Modified
Central leader system or open centre system.
Apply Bordeaux paste/Chaubattia paste/white lead paste/Zinc
paint on the cut surface.
Digging or preparation of pits for transplanting of new plants
Top working of inferior cultivars with highly superior/productive
type of cultivar
Scrap dead bark & lichen from trees with BARK SCRAPEPS or
knife (clean). After each cut sanitize the tools by rubbing alcohol/
Ethanol.
Apply fertilizer/FYM 3-4 week before expected bloom under the
tree canopy away from trunk.
FYM should be applied when sufficient moisture is present in soil
or before the rainfall is expected
Graft wood (Scion) must be collected in March before the bud start
to swell.
The scion should be one year old, vigorous& healthy diseases free.
Should have only vegetative bud not reproductive bud.
For healthy storage of graft wood, packed in moist media such as
sawdust/newspaper and storage in airtight boxes or polythene bag.
Animal Science
During winters, following diseases are prevalent in livestock: -
70
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Goat & Sheep
Disease Symptoms Prevention
Bacterial Disease
Haemorrhagic Fever, dysentery, swelling Vaccinate first dose at 3-4 month
Septicemia of lower mandible and of age and booster at 3-4 week after
death more occurred. first dose. Repeat at every 6/12
months interval in sep/oct.
Brucellosis Abortion during late Disposal of dead foetus and
pregnancy, infertility, placenta. Use gloves while handling
scrotal swelling in male, infected items as it affects human
joint swelling beings.
Pneumonia Fever, respiratory distress, Clean water, well ventilated house.
mucous discharge from
nostril, reduced feed intake
and weight gain, cough
Enterotoxaemia Sudden death in young Vaccinate first dose at 3-4 month of
growing kids. Mucous age, booster at 3-4 weeks after first
diarrhoea may also seen dose. Repeat every 6/12 months
during death interval.
Collibacillinum Diarrhoea, Sudden Death, Clean and disinfect the lamb/kid
reduce feed intake, usually shelter. Provide clean water
occur in young ones
Viral Disease
Peste Des Petits Fever, Occular and nasal First dose at 3 month of age and
Ruminants mucous discharge, mouth repeat every 3 years.
(PPR) lesion, respiratory distress Separation of infected one from
healthy animals.
Foot and Fever, wound lesion in First vaccination at 3-4 month and
Mouth Disease foot and mouth, excess Booster 3-4 week after fist dose.
salivary secretion, difficult Repeat every 6/12 months interval
in walking in Oct and April
Contagious Postules, Scrab formation, Wash with 1% potassium
Ecthyma Extension Lession around Permagnate solution. Apply tincture
(Khalay) Mouth slips. Anorexia and iodine followed by glycerine. Isolate
starvation. Kids are more the affected animals from other
susceptible to the disease healthy animals
71
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Disease Symptoms Prevention
Endo/Ecto-Parasitic Disease
Fluke infection Emaciation, anaemia, Control of snails, avoid grazing in
edema in lower jaw early morning and late evening,
deworming of animals periodically.
Tape worm Reduced growth, fever, kid Deworming of animals periodically,
mortality every six months
Round worm Fever, anaemia, edema in Deworming of animals periodically,
lower jaw, reduced growth every six months
Coccidiosis Blood-tinged brownish Clean shed, spray of 10% ammonia
diarrhoea, anaemia, kid solution, administration of
mortality anticoccidial drugs.
Pediculosis Reduced growth, skin Clean shed, disinfect the shed
allergy and wound, periodical Pre and post winter
Anaemia and sudden dipping. Usually dipping should
death. be done just after shearing and
combing
Cattle and Yak
Disease Time of Vaccination Dose and Route
Haemorrhagic septicaemia March-April 5-10 ml S/C
Foot and Mouth Disease At 4 month of age 3 ml S/C
Brucellosis December – January 5 ml S/C
Peste Des Petits Ruminants (PPR) October- November 2ml S/C
Enterotoximia (Multivalent) August – September 2ml S/C
Common control measures
Proper drainage, sprinkling of copper sulphate near water bodies
will help to control fluke infection.
Avoid early morning and late evening grazing.
Disinfect and keep the animal shed clean and provide clean quality
drinking water.
Separate infected animal from healthy one.
72
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Provide at least 21 days quarantine to the newly purchased animals.
Rotational grazing to control infection.
Proper nutrition is essential for having healthy kids especially
during winter. Simultaneous deficiencies of energy and protein can
cause abortion of embryos early in the pregnancy. Deficiencies of
some trace minerals such as copper and iodine can be the cause of
abortions. Feeding of complete feed block and multi nutrient block
may be helpful.
In case of outbreak of contagious diseases, immediately segregate
the sick animals from healthy one and take necessary disease
control measures.
Bloat will be formed when animal consume young leaves and
grasses, unknown weeds, easily digestible cereals, rotten vegetables,
and fruits. Bloat will be followed by diarrhoea; dysentery leads to
decumbency and death. Administration of vegetable oil (50-100
ml) orally in a careful manner can help in control of bloat as a first
aid and then get veterinary doctor help. Sometime feeding potato,
brinjal may also obstruct the food passage and leads to bloat due to
obstruction of gas from the rumen.
Provide colostrums to the young ones within first few hours of
birth.
Animal shed should be well ventilated, clean, and free from
ammonia smell.
Provide good bedding material for pregnant animals and to young
ones during winter months.
Dipping of all livestock should be done with proper preferred
concentration of medicine for effective result. Dipping should be
done preferably during summer on a sunny day.
All domestic livestock should be dewormed once in 6 months.
73
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
UTTARAKHANd
Wheat
Under Irrigated conditions of Plain, Bhawar and Trai area the
timely sown varieties of wheat are UP 2903, UP 2938 UP 2855, UP
2784, Up2628, UP2554, HD 3086, HD 2967, WH 1105, DPW 621-
50, PBW 502, WH542 and BL 953 while late sown variety includes
UP2944, UP 2844, UP, 2865, UP 2526, UP 2565, WH 1124, HD
3059, PBW 590, DBW 173, DBW 71, Raj 3765, Raj 3077 and UP
2944.
In Rainfed areas of Plain, Bhawar and Trai area timely sowing (Oct.
second fortnight) varieties are PBW 396, PBW 644, WH 1080,
PBW 299, PBW 175 and V 306.
Timely sowing varieties (Nov. first fortnight) like UP 2572, UP
2584, VL 953, VL 907, VL 804, VL 738, HS 507, HS 240 and HPW
349 used under irrigated area of lower hills.
Timely sowing varieties (Oct. first fortnight) like UP 2572, VL 953
and VL 829 used under rainfed area of lower hilly area.
In Rainfed conditions of hill area timely sowing varieties (Oct. first
fortnight) i.e., HPW 42 and HS 365 used.
The recommended seed rate is 100 kg/ha.
Fertilizer and manure: 150 kg/ha Nitrogen, 60 kg/ha Phosphorus
and 40 kg/ha Potash for timely sown wheat and 80 kg/ha Nitrogen,
40 kg/ha Phosphorus and 30 kg/ha Potash for late sown conditions.
For higher yield 10 tonnes well decomposed farmyard manure
should be applied in one ha area.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp. /kg of seed.
4-6 irrigations are required.
In case of the incidence of yellow (stripe) rust, spray of
Propeconazole (25 EC) @ 1 ml /litre water should be applied.
74