ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-vIII
mAHARAsHTRA
Advisories Related to Major Rabi Crops
Chickpea:
Rainfed chickpea should be sown in first fortnight of October while
irrigated chickpea should be sown from last week of October to
first week of November. Latest improved desi varieties like Akash,
Phule Vikram, Phule Vikrant, JAKI-9218, etc. should be used for
high yield. Kabuli varieties like PKV Kabuli-2, Virat, BDNGK-798,
etc should be used. Sowing on BBF will be beneficial.
For desi varieties, 50-75 kg / ha seed rate should be used based on
seed size. In case of Kabuli and bold varieties, a seed rate of 100 kg/
ha should be used.
The seed should be treated with 4 g Trichoderma or 3 g
Carbendazim per kg of seed followed by Rhizobium and PSB
biofertilizer inoculation @ 250 g / 10 kg of seed.
A recommended fertilizer dose of 25 kg N, 50 kg P and 25 kg K
should be applied as a basal dose at the time of sowing. Applying
fertilizers based on soil testing is advisable to identify and fulfil the
need of secondary and micronutrients.
IPM practices should be followed for the control of Helicoverpa
by using 5 Pheromone traps per hectare, one spray of 5 % NSKE at
flowering stage and ETL based spray of Quinalphos 25 EC 20 ml or
Emamectin benzoate 5 SG @ 4 g or Chlorantraniliprole 18.5 SC @
3 ml per 10 lit of water.
Two protective irrigations at flowering and pod filling stage should
be given wherever available.
305
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Wheat:
The timely sown irrigated wheat should be sown in the first
fortnight of November. The late sown wheat may be sown upto15th
December if water is available. The rainfed wheat should be sown
during first fortnight of October using residual moisture available
in the soil.
The improved varieties like Tryambak, Godawari, Tapowan,
Parbhani-51, PDKV Washim, PDKV Sardar, AKAW-4647, AKAW-
1071 should be used for sowing. Rust tolerant varieties should be
preferred.
Wheat crop should be irrigated in the critical stages of irrigation
i.e., CRI stage (18-20 days), tillering stage (30-35 days), flowering
(65-70 days), grain filling stage (80-85 days) and grain maturity
stage (95-100 days). If only one irrigation is available, it should be
applied at 40-42 DAS, if two irrigations are available, it should be
applied at 18-20 and 60-65 DAS and if three irrigations ae available,
it should be applied at 18-20, 40-42 and 60-65 DAS for better yield.
The recommended dose of 100-120 kg N, 50-60 kg P and 50-60
kg K should be applied for timely sown wheat while 80:40:40 kg
NPK/ha should be applied for the late sown wheat. Half of the N
and full P and K should be applied as a basal dose at the time of
sowing while remaining half N should be applied at the time of first
irrigation (18-20 DAS). The rainfed wheat can be fertigated with 40
kg N and 20 kg N as a basal dose.
The crop should be protected from stem borer by spraying
Cypermethrin 10 EC @ 11 ml per 10 lit waters if infestation is
observed.
Rabi Sorghum:
Rabi sorghum crop should be sown on residual moisture after
harvest of green gram, black gram, or Soybean. Rainfed Rabi
sorghum should be sown during 15th September to 1st October
while the under irrigated situation the crop may be sown up to 31st
October.
306
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The recommended spacing of 45 cm x 12.5 cm should be followed
for higher yield; the seeds should be treated with fungicide and
Gaucho insecticide @ 4 g / kg of seed for the control of stem borer.
A recommended dose of 80:40:40 kg NPK should be applied to
Rabi sorghum of which half N and full P and K should be applied
as a basal dose while half of the N should be applied after 30 DAS.
Improved varieties like Parbhani Moti, Parbhani Super Moti, Phule
Vasudha, Phule Revati, PKV Kranti, etc should be used for higher
yield.
Safflower:
The rainfed safflower crop should be sown on residual moisture
during 1st October to 15th October. Irrigated safflower can be
sown up to 15th November.
A recommended spacing of 45 x 20 cm should be followed for
better yield. The crop stand should be maintained by thinning of
crop after two weeks from sowing for maintaining the desired plant
population.
Improved varieties like PBN-12, PBN-46, PBN-40 (non-spiny),
PKV Pink (AKS-311), NARI-6 (non-spiny), NARI NH-1 (non-
spiny) should be used.
The crop should be protected from the attack of aphids by using 5
% NSKE or Dimethoate 30 EC 10 ml per 10 lit of water.
Linseed:
Use improved high yielding and short duration varieties of linseed
like Latur-93, NL-97, etc.
Use recommended spacing of 30 cm x 15 cm and 10 kg seed/ha.
Finish the sowing before 15th October.
A recommended dose of fertiliser 50 kg N and 25 kg P should
be applied, out of which 50 % N should be applied at the time
of sowing and 25 kg after one month of sowing as a top dressing
should be applied.
307
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Timely plant protection measures should be followed as per
recommendations.
Mustard:
Mustard can be sown in Maharashtra in the first fortnight of
November. Improved varieties like Shatabdi (CAN-9), TPM-1, etc
should be used with 5 kg seed rate per hectare. The sowing should
be done at 45 cm x 20 cm spacing.
The crop should be protected from powdery mildew by spraying of
Carbendazim @ 10 g per 10 lit of water or wettable sulphur @ 20 g
per 10 lit of waterand timely irrigation should be provided.
Sugarcane:
Pre-seasonal sugarcane should be planted during 1st October to
15th November while seasonal sugarcane should be planted during
1st January to 15th February. 25 % more yield is realised from pre-
seasonal sugarcane.
Use improved varieties like MS-10001, VSI-08005, Co-86032, Co-
8014 (Mahalaxmi), CoM-0265, etc for higher yield
Use 25-30 thousand two budded sets for planting; maintain row to
row spacing of 90-100 cm and plant to plant spacing of 22 cm as
per recommendations.
Sugarcane sets should be treated with recommended pesticides,
fungicides and biofertilizers like Acetobacter and PSB before
planting and recommended dose of fertilizers 250:115:115 kg NPK
/ ha for seasonal sugarcane and 300:170:170 kg NPK / ha should
be applied. Nitrogen doses should be applied in four equal splits.
Advisories Related to Major Horticulture Crops
Pomegranate:
Take pruning for Ambiya Bahar in Pomegranate. Use improved
and high yielding varieties like Bhagwa and Super Bhagwa. Give
stress of 30 to 60 days according to soil type. Give light irrigation
308
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
for flowering. Precaution should be taken so that water stress
condition may not occur in pomegranate orchard. Remove suckers
shoot in pomegranate orchard. Apply FYM @ 40-50 kg per plant.
Apply fertilizer dose of 400:200:200 g / plant after irrigation.
Nitrogen should be given in two splits. Take a spray of potassium
nitrate @ 15 gm per litre of water.
Citrus (Orange and sweet orange):
Ambiya bahar management is the key operation in orange and
sweet orange in Rabi season.
Stress management should be done in the month of November
December as per soil type. 45 to 60 days water stress should be given
as per soil type. Light irrigation should be given after completion
of stress.
Take a spray of potassium nitrate @ 15 gm per litre of water.
Application of Bordo-paste should be done on tree trunk in the
month of January-February to protect the crop from gummosis
and dieback.
Apply fertilizer dose of 400:200:200 g / plant after irrigation.
Nitrogen should be given in two splits.
Mango:
Organic mulching should be done, and the orchard should be
irrigated during early in the morning, at evening or during night
hours. To protect the mango fruits from the incidence of fruit fly,
install “Rakshak fruit fly trap” developed by university @ 4 traps
per hectare. Fallen fruits should be collected and destroyed to keep
orchard clean.
Banana:
To protect the crop from the severe cold wave, make a smoke in
the orchard to increase the temperature in the evening and apply
irrigation at night to raise the temperature. Organic mulching
should be done in banana orchard. Irrigate banana orchard during
309
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
early in the morning, at evening or during nighttime.
Grapes:
Management of October pruning in grape orchard should be done
as per availability of water. During rest period, provide only need
based irrigation to protect the existing leaves from drying, and
contribute towards increasing the reserves of the vines through
photosynthetic activity. Care should be taken to reduce/stop the
water in case new growth is observed on the shoot. If rainfall
exceeds 2.5 mm, no irrigation should be applied especially during
rest period.
Improved varieties like Thompson seedless, Tas-E-Ganesh, Sonaka,
Super Sonaka, Sharad seedless, etc should be used for planting.
Advisories Related to Major Vegetable Crops:
Brinjal: The crop should be planted in September-October in
Rabi season. Improved high yielding varieties like Arka Harshita,
Arka Unnati, Arka Shirish, Arka Anand, Arka Shirish, Kalpataru,
Krishna, Pragati, Vaishali, Phule Harit, Anuradha, Aruna, etc
should be used for planting. Control measures should be taken
for brinjal shoot and fruit borer. If observed, collect, and destroy
caterpillar or Spray Neemark 4% or Cypermethrin 25% EC 5 ml or
Chlorpyriphos 20 EC 20 ml OR Deltamethrin 1 % or Trizophos 20
ml per 10 litres of water.
Tomato: Triple disease resistant varieties of tomato like Arka
Rakshak or Arka Samrat should be used for higher yield. The crop
should be planted in the month of August-September for Rabi
season.
Onion: Improvedvarieties like Baswant-780, N-2-4-1, Agri Found
Light Red, Phule Samarth, Bhima Super, Bhima Red, Bhima
Shakti, Bhima Shubhra, etc should be used for Rabi cultivation.
Transplanting should be done in the month of October-November.
Seed can also be done by tractor drawn BBF to save the labour
charges and time for seedling preparation and transplanting. Apply
310
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Malic Hydroxide-40 @3000 ppm solution 15 to 20 days prior to
harvesting to increase shelf life of onion. Also stop irrigation
before three weeks of harvesting.
Okra: To control powdery mildew in okra, three sprays of 0.03%
wettable sulphur should be taken at 10-15 days of interval.
Improved varieties like Parbhani Kranti, Arka Anamika, Phule
Kirti, Utkarsh, PBNOK-1 should be used for higher yield.
Advisories Related to Major Floriculture Crops:
Gaillardia: Planting should be done through seeds or seedlings in
well-drained soil by using varieties like Murgudi, Fulzari etc. Apply
50:50:50kg NPK/ha at the time of sowing, remaining 50kg N apply
after 30 days after planting.
Marigold: Marigold should be planted at 60 x 45 cm spacing in
well-drained soil. Seedlings should be prepared through seeds of
varieties like Local red, Local yellow, Bangalore local, Orange Crush.
Pineapple Crush, Pusa Basanti Genda etc., Apply 50:50:50kg NPK/
ha at the time of sowing, remaining 50kg N apply after 30 days after
planting.
Chrysanthemum: Chrysanthemum requires well drained soil.
Apply 112000 saplings/ha for plantings of variety Sankar-1,
Guldasta, Raja, Piwlirevdi, Pandhrirevdi, Zipri, Birbal sahani, etc.
Application 75:50:50kg NPK/ha apply at sowing time remaining
75kg N apply after 30 days after planting.
Tuberose: Tuberose should be planted at 30 x 30 cm spacing in
well-drained soil. Application of 50:50:50kg NPK/ha should be
done at the time of sowing time. Remaining 50kg N should be
applied after 30 days of planting as top dressing. Improved and
high yielding varieties like Single, Double, Phule Rajani, Shrungar,
Rajat, Kolkata Single, Prajwal, etc should be used.
Gladiolus: Gladiolus should be planted at 30 x 30 cm spacing in
well-drained soil. Application of 50:50:50 kg NPK/ha should be
done at the time of sowing time. Remaining 50 kg N should be
311
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
applied after 30 days of planting as top dressing. Improved high
yielding varieties like Apsara, Meera, Sapna, Punam, Phule Ganesh,
Phule Prerana, Phule Tejas, Nilrekha, White Prosperity, etc should
be used.
Jasmin: Planting of jasmine should be done by cutting in well
drained black soil; while planting apply 20:20:20 gm NPK/plant,
after two months apply 20 gm N/plant. After one year Apply
100:50:50kg NPK/ha at the time of pruning of plants. Improved
varieties like Single, Double, Motiya, Madanban, Gundmalai, Bela,
Bangalore, etc should be used for higher yield.
Rose: Plant graft in Light to medium well drained soil at 150 x 150
cm spacing. Apply 20:15:15 gm NPK/plant at the time of pruning.
The crop should be protected from diseases like downy mildew
and powdery mildew. Spray of copper Oxychloride 75 WP 20 g or
Captan 50 % WP 25 g per 10 lit of water if incidence is observed.
Advisories Related to Livestock and Fisheries:
Dairy Cattle: Vaccination of cattle to protect them from deadly
viral foot and mouth disease should be completed in September-
October and March-April twice in the year.
Goat: Vaccination of goats to protect them from deadly viral PPR
disease (Bulkandi) disease should be completed once in every three
years.
Poultry: Vent pecking is hazardous and economic loss-making bad
habits of newly developed poultry breeds like Grampriya, Kaveri,
Vanaraja and Giriraja. To avoid this loss, poultry farmers should
follow debeaking of birds and sufficient vitamins (A, D, E, K) and
minerals (Ca, P, Na) should be given to the birds through feed or
water regularly.
Fodder management: To avoid the annual green fodder scarcity to
domestic animals, high yielding Napier fodder varieties like BNH-
10, Phule Gunwant and DHN-6 should be cultivated by farmers on
0.04 ha area per animal.
312
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fisheries: Farm pods created under NHM, and state department
of agriculture should be utilised for fish farming where water is
available throughout the year. Mixed fish breeds like Rohu, Katla,
Mrigal and Cyprinus can be grown in fishponds. Biofloc fish
farming should be adopted by small and marginal farmers.
Advisories Related to Allied Enterprises:
Sericulture: Mulberry variety V-1 should be planted for higher leaf
yield and quality cocoons. One-acre leaves will be sufficient to rear
200 DFL batch. About 1700 sq. ft. space will be required for 200
DFL. One spray of growth hormone Serimore @ one ampule / 50
DFL should be applied at the time of fifth feeding after forth mode
for increasing yield and quality of cocoons. One spray of growth
hormone Sampoorna @ one ampule / 50 DFL should be applied
at the time of 5-10 % sampling of cocoon formation for uniform
growth of silkworms. Cocoons should be harvested after five days
of cocoon formation. Cocoon harvester machine should be used
for harvesting of cocoons for saving the labour.
Advisories Related to Post Harvest Management and Value
Addition:
Sweet Orange: Sweet orange fruits should be kept in cold storage
at -6 0C for 90 days to increase its shelf life. Waxing can also be
done.
Grapes: The fresh fruits should be converted into resins. The fruits
can also be kept in cold storage to increase its shelf life.
Aonla: Aonla fruits should be processed and converted into value
added products like Aonla candy, Aonla pulp, Aonla syrup, Aonla
powder, Aonla supari, etc.
Pomegranate: Pomegranates should be used to make value added
products likeAnardana, Pomegranate juice, etc.
Vegetables: Tomatoes should be processed to make tomato ketch
up, tomato sauce, etc. Green and red chilli should also be processed
313
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
to make value added products like chilli sauce, red chilli powder,
green chilli paste, etc.
Cereals and pulses: Sorghum and wheat grains should be stored at
below 14 % moisture for long term storage. Improved grain storage
bags should be used for storage of wheat, rice, etc. Pulses crops like
pigeon pea, chickpea, green gram, black gram should be processed
to convert into dal for higher returns. Innovative packaging should
be used for fetching more prices in the market.
Advisories Related to Farm Mechanization and Soil Water
Conservation:
Use minimum tillage operations, avoid ploughing for land
preparation to protect land from evaporation losses and to conserve
the soil moisture.
Use BBF planter for sowing of chickpea for in situ moisture
conservation.
Chickpea crop should be irrigated through sprinkler irrigation at
critical stages like flowering and pod filling for increasing yield
wherever irrigation is available.
Use of reapers / combine harvesters should be preferred for
harvesting of crops like wheat, chickpea, safflower, etc.
Rabi onion should be sown with CRIDA Tractor drawn Onion
Seed Planter to save labour expenses and to achieve more work
efficiency.
Advisories Related to Farm Women:
Farm women should use cycle hoe for intercultural operations in
field crops to reduce the drudgery.
Use serrated sickle for harvesting of Jowar, Bajra and similar crops
which reduces the drudgery of farm women.
Shed net farmers may use vegetable transplanter to reduce drudgery
in transplanting, time, money & labour cost.
314
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Each farm woman should develop a model nutritional garden in
their farm or home premises to enhance nutritional status and
nutrition security of farm family.
Nutri-cereals should be added in cropping systems. Nutri-cereals
like finger millet, fox tail millet, little millet, etc. can be grown in
the Rabi season.
Farm women should grow sorghum crop for hurda (tender roasted
grains) on small area and sale it with attractive packing to earn
extra income. Similar practice can be done in case of chickpea.
315
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
gUJARAT
Advisories for the crops sown/growing in kharif but will
continue during Rabi:
Paddy:
To manage wilt disease in paddy, spray 1 g streptocycline + 10 g
copper-based fungicide in 15 lit of water
At 50 per cent flowering, spray 25 g mencozeb OR 10 g carbendazim
in 10 lit. water to manage false smut disease
Use sex pheromone traps @ 40 / ha to check infestation of stem
borer
Groundnut:
In late sown / late maturing groundnut crop, spray 10 ml
hexaconazole / 10 lit water to manage rust disease
The crop at maturity showing pale yellow colour of leaves should
be checked randomly for pod filling and maturity. If the grains are
developing pink colour, harvest the crop by uprooting and keep
for sun drying. After sun drying the harvested crop for 4 – 5 days
when the moisture level in grains goes below 8 – 7 per cent, carry
out threshing and separate the pods from plants
Store the pods in clean gunny bags in dry condition.
Castor (Irrigated):
On attaining 70 DAS, top dressing with nitrogenous fertilizers
should be done based on the region-specific recommendations and
soil health card
Inter cropping of chickpea can be adopted to increase economic
return from unit area
316