ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-vII
mANIPUR
Agronomy & Horticulture
Left over soil moisture after harvesting of kharif paddy should be
utilised low water requirement crops such as lentil, latharus, field
pea, chickpea, and rape seed mustard etc.
Sowing of rabi crops should be started from mid-October to ending
November.
Field pea varieties, Aman, Prakash, Rachna and Aparna should be
sown at a seed rate of 60 to 80kg/ha with a spacing of 30cm x 10cm.
Chickpea var. JG-14, JG-16 should be taken up at a seed rate of 60-
80kg/ha with spacing 30cm x 10cm.
Lentil variety HUL-57 can either be grown in residual moisture
(utera cultivation/relay cropping) or with little irrigation after
harvest of paddy with a seed rate of 40-50 kg/ha at a spacing of
30cm × 10cm.
For acidic soil, liming should be done at sowing time by using Ca
CO3 @ 500 kg/ ha in furrows. Apply NPK@ 20:40:20 kg/ha for rabi
pulses.
Rapeseed-mustard
As relay crop- If soil moisture is optimum (when step on the soil,
footprints are observable but not much impression is made) and
supposed to be dried up at the time of harvesting, the seeds should
be sown just before 4-7 days of harvesting rice crop so that it can
germinate using the conserved moisture.
Sowing seeds and straw mulching: Seeds should be sown directly
into the field and planking follows to fall down the stiff stubbles
and then rice straw should be scattered very thinly over the entirely
field.
257
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Suitable variety of Manipur- Toria var.: M-27, TS-36 and TS-38,
Yellow sarson: Ragini, Mustard: NRCHB-101
Seed rate: 12-14kg/ha. Seeds may be mixed with sand (3to3.5 kg
seed+ 2 kg sand for 0.25 ha area) and broadcast.
Apply fertilizer dose of 88 kg urea+130 kg SSP+ 33 kg MOP. Total
quantity of SSP (130kg) + half of MOP (16kg) should be applied
at sowing. First half urea (44kg) should be applied when 1-2 true
leaves emerged and the remaining 44 kg with remaining 17 kg
MOP should be applied at 25-30 days after first application.
Rabi maize should be sown from mid-October to ending November
with suitable variety such as HQPM-1, HQPM-5, RCM-76 @ 20
kg/ha with spacing 60 cm×20cm. Apply 10 t/ha FYM or Compost
10-15 days prior to sowing, 150-180 kg N, 70-80 kg P O , 70-80 kg
2 5
K O and 25 kg ZnSO .
2 4
258
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
While carrying out the field activities, safe distance of 3-4 ft should
be maintained and engaging more number of people on the same
day should be avoided.
Preparation of nursery raised beds for sowing of seeds of rabi
vegetables (cauliflower, cabbage, broccoli, chilli, tomato, onion,
garlic, radish, carrot, beat root etc.) may be done during Sep-
Oct and transplanting should be done 30-45 days after sowing
depending upon the crops.
Recommended and known varieties of Cabbage (Green Hero,
Rare Ball), Cauliflower (White Excel, Sweta, Pusa snowball etc.),
broccoli (Green magic, Harumi 88, Puspa etc.), tomato (Arka
Rakshak, Arka Samrat), Onion (Arka Lalima, Bhima Shakti, Bhima
Kiran, Prema) can be used. Seeds should be procured from reliable
sources.
259
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Farmers are advised to grow the leafy vegetables which have high
medicinal values.
Farmers are advised to treat vegetable seeds with Trichoderma viride
or Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 5-10 g/ l of water for controlling
damping off. Seeds should be soaked for specified period of time
and dried into shade properly before sowing. Vegetable nursery
should be sown in line to avoid further spread of any diseases on
15-25 cm high raised beds. FYM @ 4 kg/m2 should be incorporated
in soil during nursery bed preparation. Proper drainage should
be provided to avoid water logging and rotting of seedlings. Line
spacing of 10-12cm should be marked before sowing of seeds.
Ideal time for sowing of King chilli is Dec- Jan. The medium of
nursery bed should consist in the same ratio of vermicompost,
garden soil and sand (1:1:1 by volume). Sowing should be done
on raised nursery beds of 1m width with convenient length or
on plastic trays or wooden boxes etc. Transplanting of seedlings
should be done 30-45 days after germination in the month of Feb-
March for early harvest.
Prepare fields for rabi season vegetable crops by mixing 15-20
tonnes/ha of well decomposed Farm Yard Manure. Apply compost/
FYM to soil 3 weeks before sowing or last ploughing to get better
results (increased fertility and water holding capacity of soil).
Enrich FYM with bio agents like Trichoderma and Pseudomonas
sp.
Grow triple disease resistant varieties of Tomato like Arka Rakshak,
Arka Samrat for higher yield. Transplanting of seedlings should be
done at 60 x 60 cm or 45 x 45 cm. Apply NPK @ 120:80:80 kg/
ha, 400g of seeds is sufficient for raising nursery for transplanting
1ha. Ensure staking with bamboo while planting indeterminate
varieties of tomato like Arka Rakshak and Arka Samrat on raised
bed. Plants should be kept weed free and avoid water stagnation.
Biodegradable poly films may be used for mulching to conserve
soil moisture and control weed infestation.
260
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Proper weed management practices of crops like mulching with
locally available materials (rice straw, rice husk etc.) prevent to soil
erosion and conserves moisture thereby controlling weed growth.
Other practices like hoeing, earthing up, irrigation should be
followed timely.
Need based irrigation and other intercultural operation should be
carried out at regular intervals in vegetable crops.
Constant monitoring of crops against insect pest attack and
roguing of infected plants regularly is advised. In solanaceous
crops, constant monitoring of borers by using pheromone traps
10-15/ha is advised.
Hand glove and mask should always be worn during the spraying
of fungicides and insecticides in the field and equipment should be
washed properly before and after use.
After harvesting of the vegetable crops (cabbage, cauliflower,
broccoli, beans, tomato, potato, and onions), the supply of the
harvested produce to market may be done via the agency/sellers/
vendors, middlemen identified by the State Government or with
the help of FPO and SHGs as per the demands.
Safety measures to be followed while harvesting potato, cabbage,
vegetable pea, storage, and transport to markets. Adequate personal
safety measures to be taken for loading and transporting of farm
produce. Precautions to be followed for direct marketing/ supply of
vegetables such as tomato, cauliflower, green leafy vegetables, peas,
cabbage from farms.
Shelf life of harvested tomato, potato and onions can be extended
by adopting traditional method (cool ventilated bamboo structure,
zero energy cool chamber) in case of delay in marketing. Store
potato in cool, well ventilated bamboo structures with no windows
on 3 to 4-inch layer of dry sand.
After digging the onion, dry it in the shade for 3 days and separate
the bulb of the onion by breaking the stalk from 1.5-2 cm, this will
increase the storage capacity of onion. Garlic should be harvested
261
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
with stalks and leaves.
Farmers should preserve required quantity of indigenous quality
seeds (king chilli, garden pea, red potato (Aberchaibi), broad bean
etc.) for next season.
Local indigenous herbs like allium spp, eryngo, houttuyniacordata
etc. should be grown.
Fisheries
Farmers are advised to maintain the water depth up to six feet as
temperature of the surface water is colder than the bottom layers;
the fish prefers to live in the bottom zone.
The farmers are advised to aerate their ponds either by adding fresh
water or by using aerators, especially during early hours of the day
as oxygen levels decline in ponds due to reduced photosynthetic
activity.
It is advisable to provide low protein diets and necessarily reducing
the addition of organic manures in the pond. It is also advised to go
for periodic raking of bottom soil.
Feeding rate should be reduced by 50-75% depending on the
temperature.
During winters, various diseases (fungal, bacterial, and parasitic)
like fin rot, gill rot, EUS and argulosis are commonly encountered.
Treating the pond with CIFAX @ 1 litre /ha just before the onset of
winters may reduce the disease problems. Treatment of potassium
permanganate @ 2.5 -5 kg/ Ha or lime @ 125-300 kg/Ha. Salt
application @ 250 kg/Ha also helps in protecting fish against
disease outbreak during winters.
Agricultural Engg.
Manually harvesting/ picking, accomplish the operation in 4-5feet
spaced strips assigning one strip to one person. This will ensure
adequate spacing between the engaged labour.
262
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
All the persons engaged should use masks and ensure hand washing
with shop at reasonable intervals.
Maintain safe distance of 3-4 feet during rest, taking of meals,
transfer of produce at collection point, loading/unloading.
Stagger the field operations wherever possible and avoid engaging
a greater number of persons on the same day.
Engage only the healthy persons to the extent possible and after
reasonable enquiry as to avoid the entry of any suspect or likely
carrier during field activity.
Prefer mechanized operations over the manual ones wherever
feasible. Only the essential numbers of persons should be allowed
to accompany the machine.
Farm machinery should be hired from Custom hiring centre and
sanitize every after used.
All Farm machines should be sanitized at the entry point and
at regular intervals. All transport vehicles, gunny bags or other
packaging material should also be sanitized.
The collection of the produce may be done in small heaps spaced
at 3-4 feet and field level processing should be assigned to 1-2
persons/heap to avoid crowding.
263
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Farm level storage like Zero Energy cool chambers should be used
for storing of fruits and vegetables to avoid immediate rush to the
market.
Low cost Pusa Concentric Onion Storage Structure should be used
for storing of Onion to control high rotting percentage and fungal
infestation of onion under normal condition.
Plant Protection
Restrictions due to lock down might limit the availability of plant
protection chemicals.
Rather than curative measures, preventive measures using various
methods with locally available resources will serve as a promising
alternative in maintaining the plant health.
Cultural, Physical & mechanical methods and use of Indigenous
Technology Knowledge (ITK) and also sharing the most effective
ITKs amongst farmers provided Social Distancing and maintaining
proper hygiene will play a key role in protecting the crop form
various Insect pest and diseases during and after the lock down.
Cultural Methods
Roguing of disease plants, removal of undesirable plants that might
serve as reservoir for insect pest and disease etc helps in reducing
pest and diseases incidence.
Selection of clean and certified seeds and treating seeds with
fungicide or bio-pesticides before sowing for seed borne disease
control.
Rotation of crops with non-host crops helps in reduction of
incidence of soil borne diseases.
Planting of mustard as a trap crop in every 15 rows of cabbage can
effectively manage diamond back moth.
Marigold planting with solanaceae, crucifers, legumes, cucurbits
can lower the incidence of nematodes. In tomato marigold or
cucumber is commonly used as trap crop for every 15 rows of the
264
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
main crop to attract tomato fruit borer.
Mechanical Methods
Sun Drying of grains effectively reduce stored grain pests such as
rice weevil, pulse beetle etc.
Light Trap serve many purpose like monitoring initial infestation,
Seasonal incidence, trapping and killing.
Hand picking of red hairy caterpillar and destruction of egg masses
of Pierisrapae (Cabbage white butter fly), Spodopteraetc helps
in eliminating the insect pest in vegetable crop such as cabbage,
cauliflower etc
Banding with grease or polythene effectively controls mango mealy
bugs.
Locally made yellow traps made of locally available material applied
with petroleum jelly or castor oil can be used to effectively manage
aphids in rapeseed mustard, cucumber, and other vegetables.
265
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Traps can be made using ripe mash papaya in a container with
a hole to capture both male and female fruit flies for Pumpkin,
tomato, mango, watermelon etc.
Keeping of bird perches in the field for allowing birds to sit and
feed on insects and their eggs, larvae and pupae stages.
Specific pheromones, traps can be used to monitor and mass
trapping of target pests.
Methyl eugenol can be used as fruit fly’s traps.
Following Indigenous Technical Knowledge (ITKs) may be used
for various plant protection measure-
Diseases
S. Crop Disease/ Insect ITKs
No. pests
1 Chilli Damping off and Apply fresh cow dung near the collar
Die Back region of chilli plant
Bunchy top Dusting of ash
2 Rice Brown spot 2-3 kg of fresh papaya leaves smash and
Disease of rice sock in 3-4 litre water overnight. After
filtration, the solution is mixed with
50-60 litres of water and 250ml soap
solution.
Insect Pests
1 Onion, Okra, Beetles, leaf Sprinkling of ash in and around the
Brinjal and defoliating insects, vegetable crops
Tomato leaf miner, thrips
and aphids
2 Various crops Soil insect pest Soil application of Dried seeds and
leaves of Neem or Melia azedarach
(Local name: Seizarak)
3 Vegetable Aphids and Jassids Extract of green chilli and garlic as foliar
crops spray
Stored Grain Pests
1 Rice Rice weevil, rice Grain stored with neem leaves reduced
moth etc the incest pest damage
266
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
2 Green gram Various stored Treating the seeds thoroughly with
and other grain insect pests mustard oil
pulses
3 Green Gram Various stored Seeds treated 1% neem leaf powder
grain insect pests prior to storage
Community Science
Surplus tomato produces to be converted into tomato puree and
ketchup.
Washing of hand with soap or rub with hand sanitizer before
preparation of food and lactating the babies.
Supplementing and weaning foods should be prepared with locally
available rice, dal, soybean after proper washing, drying and
grading.
Maximum nutrient loss minimization practices to be followed
while preparing food to avoid nutrient loss and wastage.
Sun drying (shade) to be encouraged for any surplus leafy
vegetables and fruits.
Drinking water should be boiled and boiled water be used for
rinsing utensils before serving food.
Animal Science
Deworm your animals with Albendazole or Fenbendazole @ 10mg/
kg body weight.
Vaccinate your pigs with swine fever vaccine.
Keep your duckling worm specially during winter night.
Oath folder seedling should be done during October and November
for cattle feed.
Protect your birds from coccidiosis by giving cordinal powder/
Furasol powder @ 1g/litre of drinking water.
Apply paste of ferrous sulphate with gur at the teats of feeding sow
to protect from piglet anaemia.
267
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
megHALAyA
Boro Paddy
Boro paddy variety viz., Navin, Bisnuprasad, Joymati, KRH 2,
DRRH 1, Swarna Ganga Red should be selected.
Nursery raising should be done in the month of November to
December.
The field should be ploughed 3 to 4 times followed by laddering.
Levelling should be done properly to retain water uniformly in the
field.
Application of FYM @ 50 quintal/ha and treatment with biofertilizer
Azospirillum @ 200g/acre seedling.
Transplanting @ 2-3 seedlings/hill should be done in the month of
December to January.
Spacing of 15-25x10-20cm should be maintained.
Gap filling of dead hills should be done within 7- 10 days of
transplanting.
Irrigation water is to be applied to maintain 3-5 cm of standing
water in the field after 2-3 days of transplanting upto 10-15 days
before harvest.
Maize
Plough the field for 2-3 times to obtain fine tilth for better and
uniform germination.
Maize variety suitable for rabi are Hybrid 4558, Hero 22, DA61,
RCM 76, Vivek Hybrid etc.
Sowing should be done in the month of last August to mid-
September.
Application of lime @400-500kg/ha in furrows should be done to
achieve higher yield due to acidic nature of soil.
268