ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
megHALAyA
Boro Paddy
Boro paddy variety viz., Navin, Bisnuprasad, Joymati, KRH 2,
DRRH 1, Swarna Ganga Red should be selected.
Nursery raising should be done in the month of November to
December.
The field should be ploughed 3 to 4 times followed by laddering.
Levelling should be done properly to retain water uniformly in the
field.
Application of FYM @ 50 quintal/ha and treatment with biofertilizer
Azospirillum @ 200g/acre seedling.
Transplanting @ 2-3 seedlings/hill should be done in the month of
December to January.
Spacing of 15-25x10-20cm should be maintained.
Gap filling of dead hills should be done within 7- 10 days of
transplanting.
Irrigation water is to be applied to maintain 3-5 cm of standing
water in the field after 2-3 days of transplanting upto 10-15 days
before harvest.
Maize
Plough the field for 2-3 times to obtain fine tilth for better and
uniform germination.
Maize variety suitable for rabi are Hybrid 4558, Hero 22, DA61,
RCM 76, Vivek Hybrid etc.
Sowing should be done in the month of last August to mid-
September.
Application of lime @400-500kg/ha in furrows should be done to
achieve higher yield due to acidic nature of soil.
268
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed rate of 25-30 kg/ha and spacing of 60 cm x 30 cm row to row
and plant to plant should be maintained.
One hand weeding and earthing up of crop at 40-45 days after
sowing found to control the weed and increase crop yield.
Mulching with rice straw or weed biomass may control weeds and
conserve moisture for higher productivity.
Harvesting should be done when the silk attains brown colouration
Rapeseed and Mustard
Early sowing (October-November) and harvesting before the onset
of frost.
Growing of toria varieties such as M-27, TS-36, TS-46 and mustard
variety PM 27, PM 28, NRCHB 101.
Soil incorporation of Trichoderma @ 2.5 kg/ha pre incubated in 50
kg of well rotten FYM.
Seed treatment with freshly prepared aqueous garlic bulb extract
2% or Trichoderma @ 10g/kg seed for the management of seed
borne pathogens.
Avoid narrow spacing/heavy seed rate.
Use yellow sticky traps for mustard aphids.
269
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
2% neem oil or 5% NSKE is found to be effective against mustard
aphid and diamond back moth.
Practices of zero tillage mustard/pea in rice fallow to enhance the
cropping intensity.
Zero tillage cultivation of toria after rice and maize is a viable
proposition which saves time, energy and reduces cost of
cultivation.
In Dry upland terraces Maize-mustard, Maize + French bean-
mustard, Rice – mustard and Groundnut – mustard can be grown.
Marshy/lowland/wetland conditions (raised beds) Maize-mustard,
Rice-mustard, Rice-mustard-tomato, Rice-mustard-potato can be
grown.
Intercropping on raised beds: Cabbage + mustard, Broccoli +
mustard, Coriander + mustard.
The crop should be harvested as soon as the pods turn yellowish-
brown.
Rabi Vegetables
Vegetable nursery (cole crops, tomato, brinjal, chilli) should be
prepared on raised beds 15 cm high,1 metre width and length as
per convenience with polythene cover on top to prevent damage
due to excessive moisture loss.
Improved varieties of cabbage (Golden Acre, Pusa Drum Head,
Pride of India Rocket, Blue Jays) cauliflower (Pusa Snow Ball, K-1,
KSP 1173, Swati), Tomato (Rocky, Pusha Rohini, Nayak, Romeo,
Megha 2, Megha 3, Arka Alok, Arka, Rakshak, Arka Abhed )
Okra (Arka Niketan), Radish (Arka Nishant), Carrot (KSP 135),
Broccoli (KSP 5412, Indame Pirate), knokhol (White Vienna ,
Purple Vienna, Taj, Green Globe), Frenchbean (Phalguni, Arka
Arjun, Naga local), Brinjal (US 28, KSP 1072, Signath, Bholanath)
Seed treatment with Trichoderma sp @5gm/kg of seed and
Pseudomonas sp @10g/kg of seed to prevent soil borne diseases
both in the nursery as well as in the main field.
270
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seedling root dip treatment with Trichoderma viridae or T.
harzianum @ 5g/litre of water gives better protection against root
diseases in the main field.
Add enriched FYM/Vermicompost with Trichoderma and
Pseudomonas @ 500g/ quintal of organic manure in nursery for
healthy vegetable seedlings.
After transplanting mulching with locally available resources like
paddy straw to prevent moisture loss and suppress weed growth.
Spraying with bio insecticides like Neem oil; Beauveria bassiana;
Metarhizium anisoplea, Verticillium lecani should be done on
need based basis depending upon the severity of infestation by
insects. So also, the same with organic fungicides like blitox-50;
bordeaux mixture 1% etc against diseases like leaf blight; leaf spot;
downy mildew.
Making own biopesticides by using locally available neem leaves,
garlic, tobacco etc.
Install yellow sticky traps @ 12/acre to monitor cabbage aphids.
Install pheromone traps @ 4-5/acre for monitoring Diamond back
moth.
Mulching with paddy straw or any dry leaves can be done to
increase soil temperature, conserve soil moisture especially during
the dry periods.
For farmers that lacks source of irrigation, they can go for vegetables
cultivation in fallow paddy fields with the raised and sunken bed
system.
Harvested maize stalk should be used for mulching purpose in
between the two rows of the french bean.
Crop rotation: Paddy-Frenchbean (Lowland), Maize-Frenchbean
(Upland), Maize-Carrot-Frenchbean (Upland), Maize-
Frenchbean-Tomato (Upland), Maize-Frenchbean-Toria (Upland),
Frenchbean-bhindi-blackgram (raised beds) Frenchbean-bhindi-
frenchbean (raised beds)
271
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fruit Crops
Khasi mandarin should be prune out for the diseased and dead
branches after the harvesting of fruit.
Prune 30-40% of shoots during November- December to increase
fruiting.
Bordeaux paste (1:1:10) should be applied after every pruning
operation.
Piggery
Use the improved breed of pig viz., Hampshire cross, Ghungroo,
Lumsniang, Large black should be reared for higher growth rate
and productivity
Keep the houses clean, dry and warm.
Deep litter pig shed should be constructed to maintain the
temperature of the shed in order to avoid winter stress.
Silage preparation using sweet potato vines and other green forages
should be prepared for feeding of pigs during lean period.
Warm bedding materials like paddy straw and jute gunny bags to
be kept in conventional pig shed to keep the pigs warm.
Supplement mineral mixture @ 50-60g/day/ adult sow and calcium
to the lactating and pregnant sows @ 60-80 ml/day/sow to maintain
productivity.
Protect the piglets from cold and prepare the bedding with dry
paddy straw, gunny bags.
Deworming should be done with Albendazole/ Febendazole @ 7.5
mg/kg Body wt (at three months’ interval).
Vaccinate the pigs against Swine Fever.
Prevention and Control of African Swine Fever (ASF) in Pig
Immediate quarantine of infected and suspected farms until
diagnosis is confirmed.
272
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Establish disinfection points at entrances and exits of the pig farm/
pig sty. Foot dip with disinfectant should be made mandatory at
the entry point of each pig shed. Pig shed should be disinfected
daily with 1% formaldehyde or 2% NaOH or paraphenyl phenolic
disinfectants.
Personnel and visitors leaving the farm should ensure that shoes,
clothing and equipment are disinfected.
Pigs should not allow them to comingle with other pigs, wild boar
and other animals.
No diseased pigs should be sold to traders/ butchers. Stringent
environment friendly measures should be adopted for proper
disposal of farm waste.
Proper disposal of dead carcass with deep burial of 6 feet deep
using lime/bleaching powder.
Purchase of new pigs from known sources only. Newly purchased
pigs/ piglets should be housed separately in quarantine shed for
about 4 weeks.
Swill feeding should be restricted and if practiced, it should be
boiled properly before feeding.
Farm utensils used for feeding of diseased pigs should not be used
for feeding of healthy pigs.
Movement of animals from one household to another/ animal fairs
should be strictly prohibited.
Movement of personnel (veterinarians and farm workers) from
one farm premises to another is prohibited. No visitor should be
allowed to go inside the farms.
Management of animal health including regular deworming and
minerals and vitamins supplements.
If any pig suffers from disease, it should immediately be separated
from the healthy stock and should be reared in quarantine shed till
it is fully recovered.
273
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Proper record keeping of animal health and entry and exit of
visitors should be maintained.
Any suspected cases of ASF should be immediately reported to
Veterinary doctors and to the District Veterinary Officer.
Poultry
Dual purpose breed of poultry viz., Vanaraja, Kamrupa, Srinidhi,
Kuroiler, Rainbow rooster etc should be selected for rearing.
Proper housing is required during this period in order to prevent
from extreme winter cold.
Proper light is required @ 2 watt/bird to keep the birds warm.
Birds to be given lukewarm water to prevent any chance of upper
respiratory problems.
Gunny bags should be hanged in proper direction to avoid entry
of cold wind.
Poultry shed must be cleaned and ventilated and provide clean
drinking water 3-4 times in a day and sometimes add electrolytes
to water.
Overcrowding should be avoided. Care should be taken to avoid
cold stress in birds.
274
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The litter materials in poultry shed need to be changed to prevent
coccidiosis infestation. If red diarrhoea symptoms are noticed
in the birds, immediately administer anticoccidial drugs in the
drinking water for 3 -5 days.
Farmers are advised to clean the house of poultry birds regularly
with phenol@1 ml/ l of water to prevent infection.
Birds should be vaccinated against the Ranikhet disease, Gumboro
and Fowl pox as per the schedule.
Vitamin supplement to be given @ 5ml/100 birds (Chicks), 7ml/100
birds (Growers) and 10 ml/100 birds (Layers).
Cattle/Goat
Cattle breed of Jersey Cross can be used.
Mineral mixtures to be given @20-25 gram for calves, 50 grams for
heifers and 100-200 gram for lactating cows and bulls.
Cattle shed should be kept warm and avoid entry of cold wind.
Goat breeds like Black Bengal, Assam Hill Goat should be selected.
Animal sheds should be cleaned, dry and well ventilated.
Deworming and vaccination should be done as per schedule
Provide sufficient clean drinking water. Supplement mineral
mixture and vitamins daily.
Prepare the waste land for growing fodder and plan for winter
fodder production like oat and Lucerne.
Silage preparation using maize and other green fodders should be
prepared for feeding of cattle during scarcity of fodder in winter
periods.
Oats, being a good rabi fodder should be grown during the month
of October-November @ 80-100 kg seeds/hectare.
275
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fishery
Composite fish culture
Supplementary feed which comprises of rice bran and MOC should
be given in the ratio of 1:1. Feed may be given at 3-5% of the total
weight of the stocked fish.
If seed is available partial harvesting can be done in the month of
October depending on the growth of the fishes to marketable size.
Number of fishes harvested may be replenished by equal number
of fingerlings.
Final harvesting is done by repeated netting and then by application
of MOC @2500kg/ha in case of perennial pond.
Common carp breeding
Collection and maintenance of brooders are started in the month
of December.
Breeding in happa is conducted in the month of February to march
Clean the pond embankment and remove all weeds. If algal bloom
develops in the pond, feeding and manuring should be temporarily
stopped.
During cold weather (Severe winter), feeding and manuring in the
fishpond should be restricted.
Liming @ 65 kg/ha should be given once a month.
Partial harvesting about 25 % of the total stock can be done to
avoid overcrowded.
Three to four months before the breeding season, the common
carp brood fish are detached and stocked in segregated ponds (for
male and female) to avoid the unwanted spawning.
At the end of the season, complete harvesting and marketing of fish
can be done.
Pond repairing/renovation. Maintain depth of at least 1.5 metre.
276
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Harvesting of marketable size fish and restocking with available
fish fingerlings can be done.
Construction of new pond can be taken up.
Water quality should be checked periodically and ensure the water
colour of fishpond is always light green.
Oyster Mushroom
Growing of different species of Oyster mushroom like Pleurotus
ostreatus; P. djamor; P. sajorcaju; P. flabellatus etc is advocated from
September onwards as the weather condition is highly congenial
for mushroom production.
Moreover, consumption of mushroom boosts immunity in humans
against biotic stress particularly viral infection including Covid 19.
It also ensures income, employment, and livelihood security.
Self Help Group (SHG)
Women members in SHGs, should establish Nutrition Garden in
each household to get fresh vegetables which are rich in vitamins
and minerals to enhance immunity to combat COVID19.
The vegetables like brinjal, capsicum, chilli, cucurbitaceous
vegetable etc can be grown in kitchen garden/Nutrition Garden.
The members of SHGs can also make mask, hand gloves, cotton
clothes for family members and neighbouring community for
safety from COVID19 as well as additional income.
277
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
mIZoRAm
Maize
Land preparation and sowing of maize may be completed from
1stweek of October using composite variety or hybrid sweet corn.
Spacing for Maize may be maintained at 60x30 cm so that optimum
plant population could be maintained.
Fertilizer application using FYM and NPK @ 120:60:40 for Hybrids
using one third N and full dose of P and K at sowing time and
two split doses of N at first earthing up and one month thereafter
should be used.
For weed control pre-emergence herbicide Atrazine @ 1.5-2 kg a.i /
ha for sole crops while Alochlor @ 1.5 kg /ha can be used for mixed
cropping systems.
In areas where cutworm and White grubs are serious pests,
chlorpyriphos @ 2 litre/ha mixed in 60-70 kg sandy soil may be
used for soil amendment before sowing or cypermethrin 10EC @ 1
ml /litre may be used for foliar application.
Management of FAW (Fall Army Worm)
Hand picking and destruction of egg masses and larvae by crushing
or immersing in Kerosene water.
Application of dry sand into the whorl of affected maize plants
soon after observation of FAW.
Mass trapping of male moths using pheromone traps@15/acre.
Chemical management: i) To control FAW larvae at 5% damage
to reduce hatching ability of freshly laid eggs, spray 5% NSKE nor
Azadirachtin 1500 ppm@5ml/litre of water; ii) To manage 2nd and
3rd instars larvae @ 10-20% damage, spray Spinetoram 11.7&SC
@0.5ml/litre of water; iii) After emergence of tasselling, hand
picking of the larvae is advisable as insecticide management at this
stage Is not cost effective.
278