ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
mIZoRAm
Maize
Land preparation and sowing of maize may be completed from
1stweek of October using composite variety or hybrid sweet corn.
Spacing for Maize may be maintained at 60x30 cm so that optimum
plant population could be maintained.
Fertilizer application using FYM and NPK @ 120:60:40 for Hybrids
using one third N and full dose of P and K at sowing time and
two split doses of N at first earthing up and one month thereafter
should be used.
For weed control pre-emergence herbicide Atrazine @ 1.5-2 kg a.i /
ha for sole crops while Alochlor @ 1.5 kg /ha can be used for mixed
cropping systems.
In areas where cutworm and White grubs are serious pests,
chlorpyriphos @ 2 litre/ha mixed in 60-70 kg sandy soil may be
used for soil amendment before sowing or cypermethrin 10EC @ 1
ml /litre may be used for foliar application.
Management of FAW (Fall Army Worm)
Hand picking and destruction of egg masses and larvae by crushing
or immersing in Kerosene water.
Application of dry sand into the whorl of affected maize plants
soon after observation of FAW.
Mass trapping of male moths using pheromone traps@15/acre.
Chemical management: i) To control FAW larvae at 5% damage
to reduce hatching ability of freshly laid eggs, spray 5% NSKE nor
Azadirachtin 1500 ppm@5ml/litre of water; ii) To manage 2nd and
3rd instars larvae @ 10-20% damage, spray Spinetoram 11.7&SC
@0.5ml/litre of water; iii) After emergence of tasselling, hand
picking of the larvae is advisable as insecticide management at this
stage Is not cost effective.
278
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Pulses
Cultivation of Rajmash could be started by second fortnight of
August and completed in first
fortnight of September using improved varieties like ARUN using
basal dose of NPK @ 20:40:20 at the time of sowing.
Seed bio fortification with Rhizobium and PSB culture should be
done before sowing for better plant stand and yield.
Apply pre-emergence herbicide Pendimethalin @ 1.5 /ha or
Butachlor @ 10ml/litre of water for weed control.
Oilseeds
Soybean
Sowing of Soyabean could be completed from 1st week of September
using high yielding variety like JS 335, VL 89 and others.
Pre emergence weedicide Butachlor may be used to control upland
weeds @ of 10 ml/ litre of water.
For higher crop production NPK @ of 20:60:40 may be applied for
better yield.
Seed bio fortification with Rhizobium and PSB culture should be
done before sowing for better plant stand and yield.
279
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To control Blister beetle that feed on Soyabean flower Dichlorvos
@ 2 ml per litre of water may be used.
Toria
Cultivation of Toria could be completed from second fortnight of
September using high yielding variety like TS 67, TS 36 and Ts 38.
Spacing 30 cm row to row and 5 – 10cm plant to plant. Thinning is
done 3 weeks after sowing in order to maintain the 5-10 cm plant
to plant distance. Seed rate: 5 – 6 kg/ha.
Spraying of Isoproturan @ 0.75 kg a.i and Pendimethalin @ 1kg a.i/
ha controlled the rabi weeds effectively and produced higher yield.
For higher crop production NPK @ of 50:60:30 may be applied for
better yield.
Seed should be treated through Thirum/ Captan 2.5 gm/kg seed.
Spraying of Blitox -50 or Dithane M 45@ 2g/l of water at 10 days
interval found to be effective in controlling Rust and Alternaria
blight.
Nursery Management of Winter Vegetable Crops
Select a sunny area with well drained friable light soil rich in
organic matter.
280
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Nursery bed should be prepared by second week of August. Bring
the soil into fine tilth and raise the bed to 10-15 cm above ground
level. Mix well rotten farmyard manure/ compost or leaf compost
in the soil.
To make the soil free from soil-borne disease-causing pathogens
(Damping-off), drench the bed with 0.1% solution of Captan or
Fytolan.
Cover immediately with polythene sheet or gunny bag or thick
paper for 2 days.
Uncover the soil and get it loosened and leave it as such for 3-4
days.
Mix Malathion 5% dust thoroughly to protect the seedlings from
soil-borne insects.
Sowing should be done by last week of August or first/ second week
of September. Sow the seeds thinly in U-shaped furrows spaced at
2.5 cm and at a depth of 1-2 cm (4 times the diameter of the seed).
Cover the seeds immediately with a thin layer of sand mixed with
well dried and sieved farmyard manure.
Irrigate the sown beds using water cane fitted with a fine hose.
Seedlings are ready for transplanting 21-30 days after sowing.
Pit should be prepared and FYM should be applied 15 days ahead
of transplanting. Liming should be done earlier to transplanting
to raise the soil pH to optimum level. Pit should be treated with
insecticide before transplanting of plants. Pit should be prepared at
a spacing of 75 x 30 cm (Row to row x Plant to plant).
Rabi vegetable crops (Tomato, Cabbage, Broccoli, Onion)
Farmers are advised to prepare Nursery bed for Rabi Crops starting
from the month end of August.
Land preparation for direct sowing of Rabi crops is to be started by
the month of September.
281
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed treatment of Rabi crops to be done with Carbendazim (0.1%)
2g/kg seed and Trichoderma spp. 4-6g/kg seed.
Farmers are advised to adopt sowing of Leguminous crops as
intercrop to increase the soil nutrient where the nutrient level of
the soil are low.
Management of Aphids in Mustard
Set up yellow sticky trap to monitor aphid population.
Destroy the affected parts along with aphids.
Spray Dimethoate @2.5ml/ litre of water.
Management of insect Pests in Brinjal
Collection and destruction of infected leaves along with the insects
reduces pest incidence.
Spraying the crop with Malathion 2ml/litre of water or Carbaryl
(2-4g/litre of water) effectively controls the pest.
Powdery Mildew in vegetables
Combine 1 tablespoon, baking soda and one half teaspoon of
liquid, non-detergent soap with one gallon of water and spray the
mixture literally on the plants. Mouthwash can also be used.
Calendar of Operation for Rejuvenation of Khasi Mandarin
November:
Application of Copper Oxychloride @ 0.2% to manage pre-harvest
fruit drop.
Harvesting of fruits in right time to avoid fruit fly attack and fruit
rot
Spraying of Malathion @ 2mL/ litre over fruit to prevent fruit fly
egg laying
Apply 650g Urea + 1220g SSP + 450g MOP/ tree
Clean cultivation
Mulching of basin
282
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
December-January
Basin cleaning and making of half-moon terraces for placement of
manure and fertilizers as well as to reduce nutrient loss.
Pruning of water sprout, diseases and dead twigs and pasting of cut
end with Bordeaux paste
Scarification of gum oozing wounds and dressing with 10%
Bordeaux paste
Cleaning of lichens and mosses
Mulching of tree basin
February
Application of FYM @ 30 kg/ plant and lime @ 1kg/ plant in the
basin
To kill the trunk borer grubs, clean the bored holes of the infested
trunk with iron wire and insert a cotton swab soaked in petrol/
Dichlorvos or inject 5 mL of Dichlorvos @ 0.2% (2mL/L) and plug
with mud.
March-April
Application of 30 kg FYM/ tree/ year
Application of 650g Urea + 1220g SSP + 450g MOP/ tree
Application of Bordeaux paste on tree trunk (upto 60 cm height
from ground level)
Spraying of Multiplex @ 2.5g/L on new leaves
Spraying of Bavistin @ 1g/L + Monocrotophos @ 1mL/L on new
flushes
Spraying of Zinc Sulphate @ 0.5% + Magnesium Sulphate @ 0.2%
+ Copper Sulphate @ 0.4% + Manganese Sulphate @ 0.4% on new
flushes.
To control bark eating caterpillar, inject Dichlorovs @ 0.1% into
the tunnel
Mulching of basin
283
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Oyster Mushroom Cultivation
Cut Straw 3-4 inches and boil it for 20-30 mins. Cool it and squeeze
the wet straw to minimize moisture content. Keep it in a polythene,
layer by layer. Put the spawn in each layer. Make a hole in the
polythene. Incubate it in a dark room for 10-14 days. Take out the
polythene and keep it in a rack and water it the next day by sprayer.
Mushroom will bloom after 5-6 days and can be harvested.
Piggery
Pig farmers are suggested for regular supplementation of mineral
mixture @ 20-30 g/head/day for adult Pig and calcium to the
lactating and pregnant Sow @ 30-40 ml/head/day to maintain
productivity.
As Mizoram is currently facing African swine fever epidemic in
many districts, the farmers are advised to regularly disinfect the
farm premises and Pig sty using disinfectants such as 2% Sodium
hydroxide, sodium, or calcium hypochlorite (2-3%) etc. Foot dip
should be place at the entrance of the Farm.
Pigs brought from other farm or other location should be kept in
quarantine for at least 30 days before mixing with another herd.
Avoid bringing of Pigs from disease infected area.
If there is a suspected case of ASF or sudden death of Pigs in
your area, immediately inform the Veterinary officer for further
treatment and prevention of the spread of the disease and proper
disposal of diseased carcasses.
Farmers are suggested to feed their Pigs with locally available
non-conventional feed stuffs like kitchen waste, vegetable waste,
brewery waste, nutritious plants like wild cassava, Colacasia etc.
may be incorporated to some extend to minimize the feed cost as
well as to get rid of problem of commercial feed scarcity in Piggery.
Ensure vaccination of Piglets against Classical Swine Fever disease
initially at the age of 2 months (weaning) and then booster dose at
6 months after first vaccination and thereafter annually.
284
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Pigs should be vaccinated against FMD initially at the age of 2
months and then revaccinate annually.
Pig should be de-wormed against gastro-intestinal nematode with
Albendazole @ 5-10 mg/kg body weight or fenbendazole @ 7.5-10
mg/kg body weight orally.
Preventive Measures for African Swine Fever
Importing of pigs, pork or any by-products should be strictly
prohibited.
Disinfection and Sanitization of Pig and its premises.
No visitors should be allowed at the farm.
Carcass disposal should preferably be by burial.
Poultry
The farmers are suggested to practice backyard Poultry farming
and rear dual purpose variety Poultry birds such as Rainbow
rooster, Vanaraja, Giriraja etc. so that local demands of eggs and
meat can be fulfilled.
The maintenance of proper hygienic condition in Poultry house is
utmost necessary.
The Poultry farmers are advised to regularly disinfect the premises
of Poultry houses with 1 % sodium hypochlorite and inhibit the
entry of outsiders to the farm premises. Foot dip should be place
at the entrance of the Farm.
Before introduction of new batches of chicks in the farm, the
Poultry houses should be cleaned properly and disinfected with
60-70 g of KMnO4 mixed with 120-150 ml of formalin solution
per 10 cubic feet space. Place the birds in the shed after 24 hrs of
fumigation.
In case of deep litter system of rearing in Poultry, the litter material
should be dried completely before using it as bedding material
and the litter material should be turned and raked weekly and
285
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
should be replaced with a new litter material before a new batch
is introduced.
Ensure vaccination of chicks against Ranikhet disease, Marek
disease, Fowl pox and Infectious bursal disease.
Provide a minimum of 23 hrs light in the brooder continuously
and 16 hrs light for adult birds during the laying period.
De-beaking should be done as early as 1 day to 6 weeks and should
be repeated at 16 weeks of age if necessary.
Poultry farmers are suggested for regular supplementation of
vitamin and mineral mixture (Grow B-plex/Ambiplex) @ 10-20
ml/100 birds and calcium to the layer during laying period @ 30-
40 ml/100 birds to prevent soft shell.
Deworming of Poultry birds should be done at the age of 6-8 weeks
with Albomar liquid @ 45ml/100 birds in drinking water once in
early morning with empty stomach. De-worming can also be done
with Piperazine hydrochloride @ 5ml/10 birds.
Dairy Cattle
Farmers are suggested to follow routine deworming and vaccination
schedule for Dairy Cattle.
To maintain productivity and improve immune status of animals,
the dairy farmers are suggested for regular supplementation of
vitamins and minerals @ 50-100 g/head/day to their livestock.
Goat
Ensure deworming of Goat with fenbendazole @ 7.5-10 mg/kg
body weight orally especially kids.
Goat should be vaccinated against PPR & FMD at the age of 3
months & then re-vaccinate annually.
Goat farmers are advised for regular supplementation of mineral
mixture @ 10-15 g/head/day for adult and calcium to the lactating
and pregnant doe @ 10-15 ml/head/day.
286
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Value Addition
Preparation of tomato powder: Fully ripe tomatoes were washed
well in running tap water. Then it was cut into small pieces and
dried in the cabinet drier at 80oC for 10 hours. The dehydrated
pieces were then ground into powder in a mixer.
Preparation of tomato soup mix
Ingredients Amount Ingredients Amount
Tomato powder 5 g Pepper powder 0.3 g
Onion powder 0.5g Salt 1.5 g
Corn flour 2.0 g Ajinomoto 0.5 g
Cumin powder 0.5 g
Method: All the ingredients mixed thoroughly and packed in
polyethylene bags.
Preparation of onion powder: Disease free big onions were selected,
and the skin was peeled off. Then it was washed in the running tap
water and cut into small pieces. It was dried in the cabinet drier at
60oC for 7 hours. The dehydrated flakes were ground into powder
and packed in polyethylene bags. Ten grams of the prepared
tomato soup mix was added to 150 ml of boiled water and stirred
thoroughly.
Tomato Sauce/ Ketchup preparation method
Washing fully ripe tomatoes
Cutting, chopping and blanching
Pulping and straining
Cooking pulp with sugar
Judging end point
Addition of vinegar/Acetic acid, salt & preservative
Filling hot in bottles
287
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Vegetable Soup Mix:
Ingredients: Onions, carrot, beans, cauliflower, cabbage,
tomato, and spinach.
Preparation of vegetable powders: All the selected vegetables were
washed well in running tap water. Then it was cut into small pieces
and steam blanched for 3 – 5 minutes except onion and tomatoes.
All the vegetables except onion (60oC and 7 hours) were dried in
the cabinet drier at 80oC for 10 hours separately. The dehydrated
pieces were then ground into powder in a mixer.
Cauliflower Pickle
Ingredients Amount Ingredients Amount
Cauliflower pieces 1 Kg Cardamom 15 g
Salt 150 g Cumin 15 g
Ginger 25 g Aniseed 15 g
Onion 50 g Clove 6 nos.
Garlic 10 g Tamarind pulp 50 g
Red chilli 15 g Mustard 50 g
Turmeric 15 g Vinegar 150 ml
Cinnamon 15 g Mustard Oil 400 ml
Black pepper 15 g
Method-
Washing
Cutting into into 2 – 2.5 cm pieces
Keeping in sun for 2 hours
Frying all spices in a little oil
Mixing pieces with fried spices
Frying mixture for 5 minutes
Cooling
Making paste of vinegar and tamarind pulp
288
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Adding to cauliflower pieces
Filling in jar
Keeping in sun for a week
Addition of oil after heating and cooling it
Storage
Value Added Product from Cabbage
Select mature clean cabbage
Shred it to 5 mm and mix with 2.5 % salt
Pack it layer by layer in a container, 2/3 height
Seal hermetically and allow for natural fermentation at room
temperature
Blanch it at 70oC for 10 minutes, after 28 days
Store under shade in clean place and use it within four months.
289
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
NAgALANd
Pulse and oilseeds (Field pea, Rapeseed and Linseed)
The field should be first deep ploughed, followed by two to
three harrowing and planking should be given to prepare a well
pulverized seed bed. Field should be well levelled and there should
be sufficient moisture at the time of sowing for good germination.
Suitable varieties: Field pea - Aman, Prakash and Rachna, Rapeseed
- M 27, TS-36, TS 38 and TS-67 for late sown upto first week of
December and Linseed - Ruchi, T-397 and Shekhar.
In field pea incorporate organic matter @ 200 q ha- at the time of
land preparation and apply 55 kg of urea, 313 kg of SSP and 42 kg
of MOP per ha as basal application at the time of sowing.
In rapeseed, incorporate FYM or compost @ 50 q ha-1 at the time
of land preparation. Under irrigated condition apply 54 kg of urea,
375 kg of SSP and 50 kg of MOP as basal dose at the time of sowing
by placement method and again apply 54 kg urea at the time of
first irrigation at three weeks after the sowing. In rainfed condition
apply 50 % of the recommended dose fertilizer.
In Linseed application of 87 kg of urea, 125 kg of SSP, 17 kg of MOP
ha-1 along with FYM@ 20 q ha-1 as basal is recommended under
rainfed conditions.
Seed sowing should be done during the Second fortnight of October
to first fortnight of November however in rapeseed sowing can be
delayed upto last week of November.
Before sowing pea seeds should be treated with rhizobium culture@
50 g kg-1 seed, Bavistin @ 2 g kg-1 seed and Trichoderma viride @ 4
g kg-1 seed
For Rapeseed and Linseed Seed treatment is done with Azotobacter
and Phosphotika @ 40 g each/ kg of seed before sowing.
At least two weeding should be done at 20 and 40 DAS.
290