ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
NAgALANd
Pulse and oilseeds (Field pea, Rapeseed and Linseed)
The field should be first deep ploughed, followed by two to
three harrowing and planking should be given to prepare a well
pulverized seed bed. Field should be well levelled and there should
be sufficient moisture at the time of sowing for good germination.
Suitable varieties: Field pea - Aman, Prakash and Rachna, Rapeseed
- M 27, TS-36, TS 38 and TS-67 for late sown upto first week of
December and Linseed - Ruchi, T-397 and Shekhar.
In field pea incorporate organic matter @ 200 q ha- at the time of
land preparation and apply 55 kg of urea, 313 kg of SSP and 42 kg
of MOP per ha as basal application at the time of sowing.
In rapeseed, incorporate FYM or compost @ 50 q ha-1 at the time
of land preparation. Under irrigated condition apply 54 kg of urea,
375 kg of SSP and 50 kg of MOP as basal dose at the time of sowing
by placement method and again apply 54 kg urea at the time of
first irrigation at three weeks after the sowing. In rainfed condition
apply 50 % of the recommended dose fertilizer.
In Linseed application of 87 kg of urea, 125 kg of SSP, 17 kg of MOP
ha-1 along with FYM@ 20 q ha-1 as basal is recommended under
rainfed conditions.
Seed sowing should be done during the Second fortnight of October
to first fortnight of November however in rapeseed sowing can be
delayed upto last week of November.
Before sowing pea seeds should be treated with rhizobium culture@
50 g kg-1 seed, Bavistin @ 2 g kg-1 seed and Trichoderma viride @ 4
g kg-1 seed
For Rapeseed and Linseed Seed treatment is done with Azotobacter
and Phosphotika @ 40 g each/ kg of seed before sowing.
At least two weeding should be done at 20 and 40 DAS.
290
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
For enhancing yield through increased pollination, 5 honeybee
colonies ha-1 is recommended to install in rapeseed.
Insect pest management
Clip aphids infested shoots or parts in the early stage.
Collect and destroy the egg masses, grubs and gregarious early
instar larvae in the cropped area.
Install yellow and blue sticky trap @ 6 traps/acre at crop canopy
level to monitor the sucking pest population
Set up light traps @ 1trap/acre to monitor the emergence of adult
moth population.
In the early stage of infestation spray the NSKE or Neem oil @ 4%
Spray Trichogramma chilonis @50000/ha or Spinosad @ 0.75ml/L of
water in the initial infestation of Lepidopteran pests (caterpillars).
If infestation of the leaf feeders/ caterpillars and borers are high
spray anyone of the following insecticides, Indoxacarb 14.5 SC @
0.5 ml/L or Emamectin benzoate 5% SG @ 0.4 g/L of water
If the incidence of sucking pests persists (Aphids, Thrips, and bugs)
spray anyone of the following insecticides, Imidacloprid 200 SL @
0.5 ml/L or Thiomethoxam 25 WP @ 0.3 g/L or Spiromesifen 240
SC @ 0.5ml/L of water.
Disease management
Use certified seeds of resistant/tolerant variety.
Burn infected pea stubble soon after harvest to reduce the disease.
Avoid sowing pea in the same infected field.
Follow crop rotation with non-leguminous crops and adopt mixed
cropping.
Spray Benomyl 50% WP @80g in 240 litres of water per acre. Second
spray after 15 days interval. Or Sulphur 80% WG @750g-1kg in
300-400 litres of water per acre followed with second spray after 25
days of interval for Powdery mildew and Pea rust.
291
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Spray Blitox @3ml/lit or Dithan M-45 @2g/lit of water at 10 days
interval for Sclerotinia stem rot and Alternaria black spot.
For white rust, Spray Metalaxyl 8% + Mancozeb 64% WP @1000 g
in 400 l of water/acre.
Post-harvest management and storage
After sufficient drying in the sun threshed clean seeds should be
stored in appropriate bins or gunny bags.
For safe storage moisture content should be 9-10 percent in field
pea, 8 percent in rapeseed and 8-10 percent in Linseed.
Horticultural Crops
Prepare nursery for cole crops (Broccoli, Cabbage, Cauliflower,
knoll khol, radish, turnip etc.) and other vegetables like chilli and
tomato during the month of August-September. Prepare raised seed
bed of about 10-15 cm above the ground on a fine tilth soil with
well decomposed FYM with a size of 1m width and of convenient
length or raise in pro-tray with coco peat and Vermicompost media
in a ratio 1:1.
Prepare the field for winter vegetables by ploughing 2-3 times
to make friable soil and incorporate 10-15t/ha well decomposed
FYM.
Transplant 30–40-day old seedlings to the main field or when the
seedlings attain 3-4 leaf stage with a spacing of 45x30 cm for early
and 60x45 cm for mid and late season crops.
Start sowing of winter vegetables like French bean, carrot, pea etc in
the month of October and complete the sowing by 15th November.
Irrigate the field regularly to avoid moisture stress and get
maximum yield.
Use paddy straw or dry leaves for mulching to conserve moisture
and control weeds.
Kiwi can be propagated through hard wood cutting in the month
of December – January. One-year-old matured and dormant
292
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
shoots of the preceding summer growth having 2 – 3 nodes are
selected. The cuttings are planted in moist coarse texture media
with 2 nodes below and 1 or 2 nodes above. Care should be taken
that male and female plants are identified and planted separately
Insect pest management
Clip aphids infested shoots or parts in the early stage.
Collect and destroy the egg masses, grubs, and gregarious early
instar larvae in the cropped area.
Install yellow and blue sticky trap @ 6 traps/acre at crop canopy
level to monitor the sucking pest population
In the early stage of infestation spray the NSKE or Neem oil @ 4%
or Spinosad @ 0.75ml/L of water in the initial infestation.
If infestation of the leaf feeders/ caterpillars and borers are high
spray anyone of the following insecticides, Emamectin benzoate
5% SG @ 0.4 g/L or Flubendiamide 39.35% SC @ 0.5ml/L of water
If the incidence of sucking pests persist (Aphids, Thrips, whiteflies
and bugs) spray anyone of the following insecticides, Imidacloprid
200 SL @ 0.5 ml/L or Thiomethoxam 25 WP @ 0.3 g/L or Fipronil
5 SC @1ml/L of water.
Disease management
Use resistant or tolerant varieties
Follow crop rotation with non-cruciferous crops
Treat the seeds with Trichoderma harzianum @5g/litre of water for
an hour followed by shade dry before sowing reduces soil borne
diseases
Suitable Varieties
Cabbage: Rareball, Pusa Ageti, Pride of India, Green Challenger,
Green Express
Cauliflower: Hybrid-Madhuri, Pusa snowball 1, Pusa Sharad,
Swati, Himani
293
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Broccoli: Green Magic, Green belt, Emerald city
Knol Khol: Early white Vienna, King of the market
Radish: French breakfast, Sparkles
Carrot: Early nantes, N.S 820
Pea: Arkel, VL Matar-42, Rachana
French bean: Dwarf-Premier, Masterpiece, Green pods
Mushroom
Collect good quality paddy straw for oyster mushroom cultivation
and store in dry clean place.
Always use good quality mushroom spawn.
For the management of green mould in mushroom bag use garlic
extract. Peel garlic and make a paste of 50g (10 big size cloves) by
adding 50ml of water. Squeeze the paste through muslin cloth to
get stock solution. Spray garlic extract (stock solution) mixed with
3-5ml/litre of water on the boiled straw. 1 litre of garlic solution is
sufficient for 2 kg dry straw (5 kg of boiled straw)
Yellow sticky paper can be used for the management of flies in
mushroom cropping rooms.
Community Science
Farmers can generate income by processing and value addition
of surplus horticultural crops by pickling, dehydration etc. and
processing into different food products like juices, jam, jellies,
candy etc.
Livestock enterprise
Due to change in weather from the month of October onwards,
arrangements should be made for upcoming winter season. All the
animals are to be vaccinated against infectious diseases like Swine
Fever in pigs, FMD, HS, and BQ in Cattle, Buffalo, Goat, Mithun
etc. and Ranikhet Disease in poultry.
294
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
In the month of November sudden drop of temperature may affect
the animals and poultry birds so the livestock should be placed in
covered shed or area during the night with appropriate lightings.
Animals affected by Pica (depraved appetite) should be dewormed
and adequate amount of mineral mixtures (@2% in the diet) to
help cure the disorder.
Follow good management practices related to feeding, housing,
watering, and general hygiene to keep the animals healthy.
Animals during winter require more feed to maintain heat
production and body condition. Depending on the age and size
and outside temperature and weather conditions, you may need to
increase the daily feed allowance by 3 times or more
Since shortage of fodders during winter months may occur due
care should be taken to store the harvested fodders.
Controlled breeding programme should start and continue during
the month of February so that all the participating animals should
become pregnant at this month.
Mithun
Mithun often struggles to get enough water during winter season.
Water harvesting structure may be constructed to maintain water
uptake and keep them healthy
During lean winter there isn’t enough green jungle forages. Planting
of perennial cold hardy grasses and tree fodders in the range may
be done.
Winter stress has negative effect on immunity, fertility, and
production. Ensure timely deworming, vaccination, and mineral
supplementation to keep the Mithun in good health and in
optimum production.
295
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
TRIPURA
Rabi Rice
Transplanting of boro rice should be completed within the month
of December to January and preparation of nursery bed should be
within 15th Nov-15th Dec. At time of preparation of nursery bed
1kg Urea, 3kg SSP and 800g MOP applied as a basal for one square
meter area.
Prepare land for transplanting of boro rice by puddling the field
twice at 7-10 days’ intervals and level for uniform crop stand.
Transplanting should be done @ 2–3 seedlings per hill at a spacing
of 20 x 15 cm or 20 x 20 cm and a thin layer of water (1‐2 cm) should
be maintained in the main field up to 10 days after transplanting.
MTU 1010, Swarno, Naveen, Tripura Chikon, Gomati, Sahabhagi
are the suitable variety for boro season.
Boro rice requires 1000 sq. meter nursery area for one-hectare land.
Seed treatment with bio control agent like Pseudomonas florescence
(10-15 g per kg of seed), followed by seedling root dip @ 2.5 kg/
ha dissolved in 1000 liter of water for 30 minutes or Carbendazim/
Tricyclazole @ 2 g/kg of seed or Agroson/Ceresan 2.5 g//kg of seed
may be practiced.
For good crop apply FYM @ 5 t/ha and one third of the Nitrogen
(43 kg Urea/ha) and full dose of P and K (250 kg SSP and 68 kg
MOP/ha) should be applied as basal. While applying the fertiliser,
a thin film of water in the field should be maintained. Remaining
two doses of nitrogen should be applied at tillering and panicle
initiation stage.
Water should be maintained up to a depth of 2-5 cms right from one
week after transplanting till 2 to 3 weeks before harvest. It should be
noted that if irrigation facilities are available, water may be drained
out from the field before top dressing of nitrogenous fertilizers.
296