ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
PUNJAB
Wheat
Improved varieties
Timely Sown Irrigated Conditions: Unnat PBW 343, Unnat PBW
550, PBW 1 Zn, PBW 725, PBW 677, HD 3086, WH 1105, HD
2967, PBW 621, WHD 943 and PDW 291
Late Sown Irrigated Conditions: PBW 752 and PBW 658
Time of Sowing: First fortnight of November is the optimum
sowing time of wheat crop. However, sowing of long duration
varieties can be commenced from the fourth week of October.
Seed Rate: 45 kg per acre for Unnat PBW 550 and 40 kg for all
other varieties.
Seed Treatment
For Termite: In termite infested soil, treat the seed with
1 g Cruiser 70 WS (thiamethoxam) or 2 ml Neonix 20 FS
(imidacloprid+hexaconazole) or 4 ml Dursban/Ruban/Durmet 20
EC (chlorpyriphos) per kg seed and dry it in shade. Seed treated
with Neonix also control smuts of wheat.
For Loose Smut: Treat 40 kg seed with 13 ml Raxil Easy/Orius 6
FS (tebuconazole) by dissolving in 400 ml water or 120 g Vitavax
Power 75 WS (carboxin+tetramethyl thiurum disulphide)
Seed Inoculation: Inoculate recommended quantity of seed for
one acre with 500 g consortium or 250 g each of Azotobacter and
Streptomyces (Azo-S) biofertilizer and one litre of water on pucca
floor.
Sowing Method and Spacing
Conventional Sowing: Sow wheat with a seed-cum-fertilizer drill
at a depth of 4-6 cm. A spacing of 15-20 cm between the rows gives
good yield.
26
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Bi-directional Sowing: In this method use half the recommended
quantities of seed and fertilizer for sowing in one direction and the
remaining half in the other direction (across the first direction).
Raised Bed Sowing: With the help of bed planter, using 30 kg seed
per acre, two rows of wheat can be sown 20 cm apart on 37.5 cm
wide bed with a 30 cm wide furrow between two beds.
Zero Tillage Sowing: Wheat can be sown without any preparatory
tillage. In weed infested fields, spray 500 ml Gramoxone 24 SL
(paraquat) in 200 litres of water per acre before sowing to control
weeds.
Fertilizer Application
Apply 90 kg urea and 55 kg DAP per acre in medium fertility soils.
Apply potassium to deficient soils only.
Weed Control
To control of Phalaris minor
Pre-emergence: Stomp/Dost/Penda/Markpendi/Pendin/
Bunker/Zakiyama 30 EC (pendimethalin) @ 1.5 litre as,
Platform 385 SE (pendimethalin + metribuzin) @ 1.0 litre per
acre
Post-emergence: Leader/SF-10/Safal/ Marksulfo 75 WG
(sulfosulfuron)@ 13 g per acre
Post-emergence: Isoproturon 75 WP@ 500g per acre
Control of broadleaf weeds only
2, 4-D sodium salt 80 WP@ 250 g, Algrip/Algrip Royal/
Markgrip/Makoto 20 WP (metsulfuron)@ 10 g per acre.
Irrigation
The first irrigation should be relatively light and given after three
weeks to October sown crop and after four weeks to the crop sown
later.
27
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Army worm attack usually wheat during March-April, however it
is also observed in the month of December in fields having large
loads of paddy straw. It damages leaves and ear heads. Spray 400 ml
Ekalux (quinalphos) in 80-100 litres of water per acre with hand-
operated knapsack sprayer or in 30 litres of water with motorized
sprayer. For better effectiveness of the insecticide, spraying should
be done in the evening when armyworm larvae are more active.
This insecticide will also control aphids.
Wheat sowing with Happy Seeder
The last irrigation to paddy crop should be planned in such a way
that there is proper moisture in soil at the time of sowing of wheat
with Happy Seeder/Super Seeder.
Depth of sowing should be between 1.5 to 2.0 inches.
Use 5-10 kg more seed per acre of wheat more than recommended
in case of sowing with Happy Seeder.
Drill 65 kg DAP/acre at sowing. Apply 40 kg urea/acre before first
irrigation and broadcast another dose of 40 kg urea/acre before 2nd
irrigation. It is cautioned that in heavy textured soils to avoid delay
in urea application due to delay in second irrigation, broadcast 33
kg urea/acre before sowing of wheat and the remaining before first
irrigation.
Care should be taken that there is no clogging of seed and fertilizer
tubes of Happy Seeder/Super Seeder. Tap the tubes with a stick to
remove clogging, if required.
If pink stem borer/rice ear cutting caterpillar damage is observed in
previous paddy crop, avoid sowing wheat in the month of October.
In case of wheat sown with Happy Seeder, first irrigation should be
light and applied at 25-30 days in case of light textured soils and at
30-35 days after sowing in medium to heavy textured soils. In case
of wheat sown with Super Seeder, apply irrigation as recommended
for wheat cultivated with conventional methods. Apply irrigation
after considering rainfall forecast.
28
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Prefer to irrigate the fields during daytime to maximize predation
of insects by birds.
Regularly monitor wheat crop sown in straw managed fields in the
month of November- December to identify the problems related to
insect pest, disease, or rodent. Use recommended practices for the
management of insect pests, diseases, and rodents.
Use recommended pre- and post-emergence herbicides for control
of weeds in case of crop sown with Super Seeder and only post
emergence herbicides for crop sown with Happy Seeder.
Incorporation of paddy straw or its retention through Happy
Seeder for more than three years helps in increasing the wheat
productivity and improves soil health. From fourth year onwards,
20 kg urea can be saved per acre.
Rapeseed and Mustard
Improved varieties
Toria: TL 17 and TL 15
Raya: RCH 1, PHR 126, Giriraj, RLC 3, PBR 357, PBR 97,
PBR 91, RLM 619
Gobhi Sarson: PGSH 1707, GSC 7, GSC 6, Hyola PAC 401,
GSL 2, GSL 1
African sarson: PC 6 and Taramira: TMLC 2
Time of Sowing: The optimum time of sowing for rapeseed and
mustard is given below:
Crop Sowing time
Toria Whole September
Intercropping of Toria and Gobhi Sarson Third week of September
Gobhi Sarson 10-30 October
Raya and African sarson Mid October to Mid-November
Gobhi Sarson and African Sarson by November to Mid-December
transplanting
Taramira Whole October
29
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed Rate and Method of Sowing
When sown as sole crop, 1.5 kg seed per acre is sufficient for
rapeseed-mustard. Seed mixed with soil increases the bulk and
thus ensures uniform distribution in the field. The depth of sowing
should be 4-5 cm. Toria, raya, African sarson and taramira are
sown in 30 cm and gobhi sarson in 45 cm apart rows. For sowing of
canola gobhi sarson GSC 6 and Hyola PAC 401 during November,
reduce row to row spacing to 30 cm.
Transplanting of Gobhi Sarson and African Sarson
A successful crop of gobhi sarson or African sarson can be raised
by transplanting. For higher yield, transplanting should be done in
November.
Nursery Raising: Sowing of nursery should be undertaken about
60 days for gobhi sarson (GSL 1) and 30 days for canola gobhi sarson
and African sarson ahead of the transplanting period. About eight
marlas (200 sq. metre) of nursery is sufficient for transplanting one
acre. Broadcast uniformly 400 g seed of gobhi sarson or 600 g seed
of African sarson.
Method of transplanting: After applying pre-sowing irrigation,
prepare the field well. Draw furrows 45 cm apart for gobhi sarson
and 30 cm apart for African sarson. Place one seedling at 10-15 cm
distance. Close the furrows and irrigate the field immediately.
Bed planting: Transplanting of gobhi sarson can also be done
on raised beds for higher yield (10-15%) and saving (20-25%) of
irrigation water.
Fertilizer Application: Apply 90 kg urea and 75 kg SSP per acre
for Raya, Gobhi sarson and African sarson while 55 kg urea and 50
kg SSP per acre for Toria.
Weed Control: One hoeing to toria three weeks after sowing and
one or two hoeing preferably with improved wheel hand hoe to
raya, gobhi sarson, African sarson and taramira are adequate.
30
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Harvesting and Threshing: Harvest the crop when siliquae turn
yellow.
Sugarcane
Improved varieties-
Early Maturing Varieties: CoPb 92, Co 118, CoJ 85 and CoJ 64
Mid-Late Maturing Varieties: CoPb 93, CoPb 94, Co 238, CoPb
91 and CoJ 88
Time of Planting
Mid-February to the end of March is the optimum time for planting
sugarcane in the Punjab. Do not plant early maturing varieties after
March. Avoid late planting.
Seed Selection
The seed should be free from red-rot, wilt, smut, ratoon-stunting
and grassy shoot diseases. Use only the top two-third portion of
the selected canes for planting.
Seed Rate
Use 20 thousand three-budded setts or 15 thousand four-budded
sets or 12 thousand five-budded setts per acre. In other words, 30-
35 quintal of seed is required for sowing one acre. Due to thick
canes, seed rate of Co 118 and CoJ 85 should be kept about 10%
higher (on weight basis).
Seed Treatment
To improve germination, soak the setts in ethrel solution
overnight by dissolving 25 ml of Ethrel 39 SL in 100 liters of water.
Alternatively, soak the setts in water for 24 hours before planting.
Spacing and Planting Techniques
Trench Planting: Plant crop in rows 75 cm apart and 20-25 cm
deep trenches. After placing the setts in trenches, cover the setts
31
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
with 5 cm soil.
Paired Row Trench Planting: Plant two rows of sugarcane 30 cm
apart in 20-25 cm deep trenches.
Furrow Irrigated Raised Bed Planting (FIRB): Sugarcane can
also be planted in standing wheat crop sown by furrow irrigated
raised bed (FIRB) planter.
Sugarcane Cutter Planter: Use two-row tractor operated whole
cane cutter planter. The complete sugarcane which is fed by the
labour sitting on the machine is cut automatically into pieces
before dropping into the furrows.
Intercropping: Intercrop one row of the recommended varieties of
summer moong or summer mash in between two rows of sugarcane
to get an additional grain yield of 1.5 to 2 q/acre of summer moong/
summer mash. Mentha and okra can also be grown as an intercrop.
Fertilizer Application: Apply 130 kg urea per acre for plant crop
and 195 kg urea per acre for Ratoon.
Iron deficiency: Spray the crop 2 or 3 times with 1% solution of
ferrous sulphate (1 kg ferrous sulphate in 100 litres of water) at
weekly intervals soon after the symptoms appear.
Chemical Weed Control
Pre-emergence application of 800 g per acre Atrataf/Solaro/Masstaf/
Markazine 50 WP (atrazine) or Sencor 70 WP (metribuzin) or
Karmex/Klass 80 WP (diuron) in 200 litres of water within 2-3
days of planting effectively controls the broadleaf weeds and annual
grasses. For control of hardy weed like Bans Patta, use only Sencor
70 WP or Karmex/Klass 80 WP.
Irrigation: Hot and dry period during April to June is the most
critical period for the growth of sugarcane. During this period,
irrigate the crop at 7 to 12 days interval.
Berseem
Improved Varieties: BL 43, BL 42 and BL 10
32
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Time of Sowing: The last week of September to first week of
October is the best time of sowing.
Inoculation: The inoculation of berseem with specific Rhizobium
culture will increase the forage yield.
Seed Rate and Method of Sowing: 8-10 kg seed should be
broadcasted in standing water when the weather is calm. For
obtaining a high yield of good-quality fodder, mix 750g of mustard
seed with the full seed-rate of berseem. Alternatively mix berseem
with oats, using 12 kg seed of oats.
Manganese Deficiency: Spray the crop twice or thrice with 0.5%
manganese sulphate solution (1 kg manganese sulphate in 200
litres of water per acre) at weekly intervals on sunny days. Spray
the crop after two weeks of cutting.
Weed Control: Under situations where itsit (Trianthema
portulacastrum) is a problem, sow berseem mixed with raya which
is fast growing crop and exerts tremendous smothering effect on
this weed.
Irrigation: The first irrigation may be given within 3-5 days in
light soils and 6-8 days in heavy soils after sowing. Afterwards it
may be applied within 8-10 days during summer and 10-15 days
during winter.
Harvesting: First cutting is ready in about 50 days after sowing and
subsequent cuttings at 40 days intervals during winter and 30 days
intervals in spring, thus giving 4-6 cuttings in all.
Pea
Improved Varieties:
Early maturing varieties: AP-3, Matar Ageta-7, Matar Ageta-6
and Arkel
Main season varieties: Punjab-89 and Mithi Phali
Sowing and Seed Rate: Sowing from mid-October to mid-
November give the best crop in the plains and spacing should be
33
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
30×7.5 cm for early and 30×10 cm for main season varieties by
inoculating with Rhizobium leguminosarum. Use seed 45 kg for
early maturing and 30 kg for main season variety per acre.
Manures and Fertilizers: Apply 8 tonnes of farmyard manure, 20
kg of N (45 kg Urea) and 25 kg P2O5 (155 kg Superphosphate) per
acre before sowing.
Weed Control: For chemical weed control use Stomp 30 EC
(pendimethalin) @1.0 litre per acre within 2 days of sowing.
Potato
Improved Varieties
Early Varieties: Kufri Surya, Kufri Pukhraj, Kufri Ashoka,
Kufri Chandramukhi,
Mid-Season Varieties: Kufri Pushkar, Kufri Bahar, Kufri Jyoti
Late Varieties: Kufri Badshah, Kufri Sindhuri
Processing Varieties: Kufri Frysona, Kufri Chipsona-3, Kufri
Chipsona-1
Seed Rate: For autumn sowing 13-18 q/acre seed tubers of 40-
50 g weight should be used for planting. If the seed raised from
autumn crop is to be used for spring planting, its dormancy should
be broken by dipping cut tubers in a solution of 1% Thiourea and
1 ppm Gibberellic Acid (one ml per 100 litres of water) for an hour
followed by air drying the treated tuber pieces for 24 hours in thin
layers in shade.
Time of Sowing: The best time for sowing is last week of September
to mid-October for the autumn crop and the second fortnight of
January for the spring crop.
Method of Planting: For mechanized planting, the spacing
between the rows and tuber should be kept 65×18.5 cm or 75
cm×15 cm respectively depending upon the available machinery.
Manures and Fertilizers: Twenty tonnes of farmyard manure or
green manuring along with 75 kg of N (165 kg of Urea), 25 kg of
34
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
P O (155 kg of Single Superphosphate) and 25 kg of K O (40 kg of
2 5 2
Muriate of Potash) per acre should be used. Drill all P O and K O
2 5 2
and half N at sowing and the remaining N at the time of earthing-
up.
Earthing-up: A double mould board plough or a ridger should be
used for earthing up after 25-30 days of sowing.
Weed Control: Application of paddy straw mulch @24 q/acre
immediately after planting. Sencor/Tanoshi 70 WP (metribuzin) @
200 g as pre-emergence.
Chilli
Improved Hybrids/Varieties
Hybrids: CH-27, CH-3, CH-1
Varieties: Punjab Sindhuri, Punjab Tej, Punjab Surkh, Punjab
Guchhedar
Sowing Time: The seed is sown in nursery during end October
to mid November. Transplanting is generally done in February-
March.
Seed Rate: Seed rate is 200 g per acre when sown in the nursery.
Sow nursery in one marla (25m2) area to transplant one acre.
Nursery: To ensure successful growing of healthy seedlings
from costly hybrid seed of chilli, nursery should be grown under
polyhouse (size 24’ × 13’ × 6’) made of UV stabilized low density
polyethylene film of 200 microns (800 guage) thickness.
Time of sowing under polyhouse Time of transplanting
a) Third week of November Mid February
b) First week of February End of April
Spacing: Thick and stout seedlings perform better than tall
seedlings and should be planted on ridges at 75 cm apart with plant
to plant spacing of 45 cm.
35
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Manures and Fertilizers: Apply well–rotten farmyard manure 10-
15 tonnes or 6 quintal paddy straw compost per acre for improving
the soil health and yield in chilli. The recommended doses of
fertilizers are 25 kg of N (55 kg of Urea) and 12 kg of P2O5 (75
kg of Single Superphosphate) and 12 kg of K2O (20 kg of Muriate
of Potash) per acre. Whole P2O5 and K2O together with 1/2 N
should be drilled at transplanting and the remaining N should be
top dressed after first picking. Apply 30 kg N (65 kg urea) per acre
to hybrid chilli.
Growth Regulator: Due to high temperature in May-June dropping
of flowers take place. Two foliar sprays of naphthalene acetic acid
(NAA) at 10-day interval @4g after 45 and 55 days of transplanting
to increases the green and red ripe fruit yield of chilli.
Cauliflower
Improved Varieties; Late Season: Pusa Snowball-1, Pusa Snowball
K-1
Sowing and Seed Rate: The best transplanting time is June-July for
the early varieties, August to mid-September for the main season
varieties and October to first week of November for the late season
varieties. The seed rate for main and late season varieties is 250 g
per acre, whereas, for early season varieties 500 g seed is required.
Spacing: For the main-season crop is 45×45 cm. and 45×30 cm for
early and late-season crops.
Manures and Fertilizers: 40 tonnes of farmyard manure, with
50 kg of N (110 kg of Urea), 25 kg of P2O5 (155 kg of Single
Superphosphate) and 25 kg of K2O (40 kg of Muriate of Potash)
per acre is the optimum fertilizer dose for all these varieties. Apply
whole of farmyard manure, P2O5 and K2O and half N before
transplanting and the remaining half of N as top-dressing four
weeks after transplanting.
Irrigation: First irrigation should be given just after transplanting.
Subsequent irrigations can be given at an interval of 7-8 days during
36
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
summer and 10-15 days during winter depending upon soil type
and weather. The total numbers of irrigations required are 8-12.
Dairy farming
October
All categories of animals should be de-wormed at this time.
The animal should become pregnant again in 2-3 months after
calving. Animals showing post parturient anestrous should be
treated. In herds with problem of brucellosis, the 4-8 months old
female calves should be vaccinated for brucellosis.
November
Reduce the amount of crude protein in concentrate mixture by
reducing the quantity of oil seed cakes in it. Prune the trees to allow
sunshine inside the shed.
December
Tie animals in dry place to protect them from cold. Quickly replace
the wet bedding material/straw
Give heeng occasionally to calves to protect them from cold.
Keep animals under the roof at night and in the sun during the day.
Apply a solution of glycerin and betadine in case of cracked teats.
Mix straw while feeding first cut of berseem. In case of bloat, give
the vegetable oil (mustard, sesame, peanut, or sunflower oil) to the
animal. Avoid berseem in animals showing prolapse.
January
Do not cover the shed on all sides. Keep windows and skylights
open for ventilation inside the shed.
To protect from cold, the animals may occasionally be given
lukewarm water to drink.
37
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Keep animals on the katcha floor for half the time to prevent
lameness.
February
In case of infestation, apply the acaricide for control of ectoparasites
in cattle.
Find out and fulfil the summer fodder availability in this month.
Check the working of fans and fountains in the shed.
The animal which has been inseminated two to three months ago
should be checked for conception.
March
Spray 10% Phenyl or 2% copper sulphate (neela thotha) solution
to control pests and germs in the shed. Reduce the movement of
7–8-month pregnant animals and feed them concentrate mixture
strictly according to the level of milk production. Dried off animals
need 1.5-2.5 Kg concentrate mixture daily.
Goat Farming
October
Check the animals inseminated in September for signs of oestrous
if signs appear inseminate them again. Goats conceived in October
will parturate in March.
Foot and mouth disease vaccination may be repeated in this month.
Animals should be vaccinated for PPR.
November
Start feeding legume fodder regularly
Start preparing for winter management and fill holes in the floor
with soil. Do not allow sewage to accumulate inside the shed.
December
Do not close the shed on all sides keep space for ventilation. Start
giving paddy straw as bedding material for animals. Kids can be
38
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
covered with gunny bag/jhull on to protect them from the cold.
Give lukewarm water at least twice a day on very cold days. At this
time a small amount of sugar / salt may be added to the water.
Carefully inspect all goats for signs of pneumonia.
January
Maintain proper drainage in goat pens and keep the floor clean and
dry. Spread straw/bedding material on the floor.
Isolate the goats ready for parturition and give them 250-500g
concentrate mixture extra, daily.
The diet of pregnant goats should be balanced in each case
according to conditions.
Place uromin lick/salt in manger for licking.
February
This is the best month to start a new goat enterprise.
Also buy new goats/kids during this month to increase the herd
size.
Keep newly purchased goats in a separate place for about a month.
Near to parturition trim the hair on both sides of the hind legs of
goat.
After parturition, dry the kid with a clean cloth and feed them
colostrums as soon as possible.
Cut lamb umbilicus with clean scissors and disinfect with iodine
solution.
March
De-worm the herd. At the age of 2 weeks, disbudding should be
done in kids.
Start feeding kids with fresh fodder like berseem at 3-week age.
Keep the kids pen dry, ventilated, and clean to protect them from
diahorrea.
39
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Pig Farming
October
Vaccinate two-month-old piglets against swine fever.
Check the number of teats of the 8–12-month-old gilt and gilt
with higher count should be preferred for breeding. Boar of eight
months age can also be used for breeding.
November
Spread bedding material for protection from cold.
Trim the enlarged hooves and needle teeth of male pigs.
Pay special attention to joint swelling.
Get tested for brucellosis in case of recurring abortions.
December
Use bulbs to keep piglet pens warm.
Provide warm drinking water if possible.
Prune the trees around the farm to let the sunlight in.
January
Mid-January to February is the best time to start a new piggery
farm. Get piglets/adult animals from a trusted organization.
Take care that only Piglets of more than or exactly two months age
(weight 8 kg) should be purchased.
Male and female animal should be bought from different places. If
this is not possible, at least buy piglets from different sows.
Check the teats before purchasing they should be in rows and the
number of teats should be more than or equal to six pairs.
February
De-worm the passel (group of pigs).
Near to calving clean the calving pen and spread straw/bedding
material. Bathe the pregnant sow with potassium permanagnate
40
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
water and isolate them in the calving pen about 10 days before
calving.
After calving, wipe clean the piglets with a clean cloth and assist
them to suckle the colostrum.
Install a light bulb about two feet high to keep children warm.
Cut the needle teeth within two days before birth and giveiron
supplementation on the third and thirteenth day to deal with
anaemia. Start giving solid food in the second week.
March
Wean the piglets 45-60 days after calving and start giving a solid
diet with 20-22% raw protein.
Sell male children who are sold by 15 days of age
Poultry farming
October
Assess the cleanliness and biosecurity of the entire farm.
Restrict workers/ visitors entering the shed unnecessarily.
November
Continue the work for the month of October
Take measures to maintain the temperature and humidity inside
the shed according to the changing weather. Check electrical
appliances, light blowers, etc. inside the shed.
December
Continue with the chores of the month of October-November.
Keep the chicks under the brooder. Use plastic curtains, heaters, or
heaters to keep the temperature constant in the shed.
Include appropriate medicine/coccidiostats in the diet to prevent
coccidiosis/ bloody diarrhea.
Add partially dried berseem to the diet of poultry birds.
41
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Remove curtains during the day so that adequate sunlight can
enter the shed.
January
Double the curtains in the shed when it is very cold. The temperature
inside the shed should not go below 16 degree C.
Increase the amount of energy (grains) in the diet by 15 to 18%.
Include appropriate medicine/coccidiostats in the diet to prevent
coccidiosis/ bloody diarrohea.
February
Continue with any pending chores from the month of January.
Collect all kinds of records in one place to keep track of the year.
Keep new workers on the farm after training.
March
Get one day old chicks vaccinated against Marek’s disease, in the
first week againstRanikhet disease, in the second week against
Gumboro disease and in the fourth week to prevent Ranikhet
disease.
Lower the temperature by about 3 to 5 degrees C each week to keep
the temperature at 21 degree C for 6 weeks. Provide 24-hour light.
Fish Farming
October
Make the following arrangements while continuing the July-
August-September work.
Start selling fish heavier than 500 grams.
Carefully inspect the fish caught for sale to avoid time-consuming
disease and parasitic infestation and to get the necessary treatment.
Arrange fingerlings equal to the number of fish taken out of the
pond after each fish is sold
42
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
November
Reduce feed supply to fish by 25-75%
If moss forms in the pond, stop feeding altogether
Continue liming and aeration in the pond
Add 400-500 gms per acre of potassium permanganate in the pond
for disinfection
Arrange fingerlings equal to the number of fish taken out of the
pond after each fish is sold
December
Stop feeding and fertilizing. Increase water level (depth) to 6 feet.
Use lime as needed in the pool.
Aerate the pond in the morning. On cloudy days aerate during the
day too. Prune trees around the pond.
If fish are seen breathing out of the pond, immediately release fresh
water or aeration into the pond.
January
Continue with the chores of December. Replace 10-20% of pond
water with fresh water.
Add lime to the pool as needed (if pH is less than 8.5).
In case of Argulus lice, apply Botox medicine (10-15 ml / acre) in
the pond thrice a week.
February
Continue the January work.
Start feeding the fish one percent of its weight during the third or
fourth week of the month, depending on the temperature.
March
Sell all fish weighing more than half a kilo by the third / fourth
week of March, continuing the work of February.
43
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
In preparation for survival in the month of April, make a nylon
thread on the pond to protect it from fish-eating birds. Never let
food get wet; keep it in a dry place.
44
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
JAmmU & KAsHmIR
JAmmU RegIoN
Wheat
Varieties for Sub-Tropical zone
Timely sown varieties (1st to 25th November): JAUW 584, HD
3226, HD 3086, HD 2967, WH 1105, RSP 561, 303, PBW 621,
DPW50, DBW 222, 88, 187 & WB-2.
Late sown varieties (20th Nov. to 25th December): PBW -752,
DBW-173, WH-1124, DBW-90, HD-3059
Very late sown varieties (26th December to 15 January): PBW-
757, WH-1021, Raj 3765, Raj 3077
Rainfed (PBW660, PBW 664, WH 1080, PBW 175, RSP 81
Restricted Irrigation: HD 3237, HI1620, WH1142, HD3043
Varieties for Intermediate (800-1350 m)
Timely sown (2nd to 4th week of November): HS562, VL907,
HS507, HPW349
Rainfed, Timely sown (Last week of October to end of
November): VL 832, VL 804
Late sown rainfed (HS 490, VL 892, HS 420)
Varieties for Temperate & High altitude
Sown during 2ndto 4thweek of November: VL907, HS507,
HPW349, VL804, HS 375
In case of Zero/ Minimum tillage method of sowing, spray 1-2%
glyphosate before sowing after the harvest of previous crop for
management of weeds
In case of Bed planter method, sowing on raised beds is possible
by using bed planter on 37.5cm wide bed and 30cm wide furrow
45