ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-II
RAJAsTHAN
General
Collection of soil samples just after harvesting of Kharif crops
for analysis purpose: After harvesting of kharif crops, collect soil
samples for different plots from the field for soil analysis purpose.
This will help in scientific nutrient management planning for
different crops to be sown in forthcoming Rabi season, Nutrient
Use Efficiency (NUE) could be increased, and this will help in
proper soil health. Using recommended dose of fertilizers as per
soil testing report in balanced ratio, the production as well as
economic profit could be increased.
Soil Moisture Conservation: Generally, in Rajasthan state
monsoon remains active up to the end of September month,
rainfall in fallow fields or in kharif cropped fields at harvesting
time can be conserved through ploughing followed by planking for
early sowing purpose of different Rabi season crops like Rapeseed-
mustard, Taramira, gram. By doing this farmer can save one
irrigation water (to be used in pre-sowing irrigation) which could
be utilized in these crops on later critical stages.
Application of Gypsum and organic manures: As per soil testing
report application of gypsum in the fields during land preparation
to maintain the soil pH at optimum level should be done. This will
help to enhance availability of different plant nutrients especially
Ca & S, as gypsum is the cheapest source of these two secondary
nutrients for plants. This increased availability of all plant nutrients
will help in higher production and quality improvement in Rabi
crops especially in oilseeds & Pulses. To increase organic carbon
level in the soil, application of decomposed FYM or any other
organic manure in the soil as per availability and mix in the
soil during land preparation should be done. This will improve
84
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
soil fertility and dependency on inorganic fertilizers could be
minimized. This will improve physical, chemical, and biological
properties of the soil.
Timely availability of quality Seed: Seed is the most important
critical input in crop production, therefore, availability of quality
hybrid/improved variety certified seed at right time at local level
and at genuine rate is the prime need of the time. For this, farmers
may contact and purchased quality seed from their nearby KVKs,
Agricultural Research Stations, SAUs, different ICAR Institutes
and cooperative societies. If purchased seed is already treated than
ok, otherwise it must be treated as per recommendation of FIR
System before sowing.
Rabi crops:
Taramira (Eruca sativa)
Rabi oilseed crop which is mostly grown in barani or in limited
irrigation facility areas, as it is a drought tolerant oilseed crop. It can be
grown in low fertile soils with conserved moisture also. Rainfall during
late monsoon period could be conserved in soil through ploughing and
planking and sowing can be done.
Seed Rate and sowing: 5-6 Kg/ha, in barani areas sowing time
depends on available soil moisture and prevailing temperature. As
per soil moisture availability sowing can be done in between mid-
September to mid-October with 40-45 cm row distance
Improved Varieties: T-27, RTM-314, RTM-2002
Mustard
Major Rabi oilseed crop of the state and Rajasthan ranks first in mustard
cultivation in the country, which is cultivated in irrigated areas as well as
in barani areas through conservation of last monsoon rainfall moisture
in the soil. This crop gives higher net return per unit area in comparison
to other Rabi crops even under low investment and low irrigation
facility. Rainfall during late monsoon period could be conserved in soil
85
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
through ploughing and planking and sowing can be done in between
late September to mid-October. Late sowing results into more incidence
of sucking pest and white rust.
Seed Rate: 4-6 Kg/ha
Manure and Fertilizers: Apply 8-10 ton well decomposed FYM, if
available and mix properly in the soil before sowing. Use chemical
fertilizers as per soil testing report recommendations & if report is
not available then in irrigated areas apply 80-90 Kg N, 40 Kg P & 40
Kg Sulphur/ha. Use total quantity of N in 2-3 split doses and total
quantity of P (prefer SSP instead of DAP) as basal dose.
Improved Varieties:
For normal situations: NRCDR-2, DRMRIJ-31, NRCHB-101,
RH-30, RGN-73, Bio-902, Aravali, RH-725, PM-32
(Biofortified).
For Barani areas: RGN-48, RGN-298, RGN-229
For late sowing: RGN-145, RGN-236
86
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To manage termite, use 2-3 ml Imidachloprid 48 FS or 2-3 ml
Thiomethaxom 30 FS / kg seed for seed treatment purpose.
For weed management purpose apply Pendimethalin 30 EC or
Pendimethalin 38.7 CS @ 1 Kg active ingredient as pre-emergence
application in 500 litre water just after sowing of mustard.
Chickpea
Gram is a most important Rabi pulse crop grown in almost all districts
of Rajasthan state under moisture conserved barani conditions through
conservation of last monsoon rainfall moisture in the soil or under
assured irrigated conditions. Suitable time for its sowing is October
month.
87
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Improved Varieties:
Desi: CSJ-515, IPC 207-28, GNG-1488, GNG-1581, GNG-
2144, GNG-2171, GNG-1958, GNG-663, Pratap Chana-1.
Kabuli: GNG-1969, KAK-2, Shubhra, Ujjaval
Seed Rate: 60-70 Kg/ha (As per seed size for small and large seeded
chickpea, respectively), 100-130 kg/ha for Kabuli chickpea.
Manure and Fertilizers: Apply 8-10 ton well decomposed FYM, if
available and mix properly in the soil before sowing. Use chemical
fertilizers as per soil testing report recommendations & if report is
not available than apply 20 Kg N, 40 Kg P & 250 Kg gypsum/ha. In
zinc deficient areas apply 25 kg Zinc sulphate/ha.
For weed management apply Pendimethalin 30 EC or Pendimethalin
38.7 CS @ 1 Kg active ingredient as pre-emergence application in
500 litres water.
For Collar rot disease management, treat the seed before sowing by
Trichoderma powder or liquid suspension.
For management of pod borer in chickpea spraying of 250 L.E. HaNPV
5% NSKE followed by 1.25 liter Indoxacarb/ ha. Installation of 7-10 /ha
pheromone traps for critical monitoring of attack of pod borer. Barley
A Rabi season dual purpose cereal crop cultivated for grain as well
as for fodder in almost all districts of semi-arid and arid region
of Rajasthan & can be cultivated in all type of soils. It can also
be cultivated under certain abnormal situations like late sowing,
barani situations, less fertile soils as well as in saline and alkali
soils. As a result of release of improved varieties, productivity levels
increased significantly.
Improved Varieties: RD-2035, RD-2052, RD-2503, RD-2552, RD-
2668(Malt rich two row barley), RD-2715, RD-2786, RD-2794,
RD-2849
Seed Rate: 80-100 Kg/ha
Sowing Time: Mid October-Mid November
88
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To manage fungal diseases, treat the seed with Vitavax power @
2 g/kg seed and for termite control with Fipronil 5 SC @ 8 ml/kg
seed.
Manure and Fertilizers: Apply 8-10 ton well decomposed FYM/
ha, if available and mix properly in the soil before sowing. Use
chemical fertilizers as per soil testing report recommendations &
if report is not available than apply 100 Kg N, 40 Kg P & 20 Kg
potash/ha. In zinc deficient areas apply 25 kg Zinc Sulphate /ha.
Use total quantity of N in 2-3 split doses and total quantity of P &
K as basal dose.
Wheat
A major Rabi cereal cultivated almost in all parts of the state & for
higher yield potential it requires sandy loam and loam, fertile and
higher WHC soils under irrigated situations. In Rajasthan state it
is mainly cultivated under irrigated conditions.
Improved varieties: Raj-1482, Raj-3765, Raj-3777, Raj-4037, Raj-
4120, Raj-4079, Raj-4238, KRL-210, BWD-303, DWD-48 (Bio
fortified variety).
89
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed Rate- 100-120 kg/ha.
Sowing Time: November
Manure and Fertilizers: Apply 8-10 ton well decomposed FYM/
ha, if available and mix properly in the soil before sowing. Use
chemical fertilizers as per soil testing report recommendations &
if report is not available than apply 120 Kg N, 60 Kg P & 40 Kg
potash/ha. In zinc deficient areas apply 25 kg Zinc Sulphate /ha.
Use total quantity of N in 2-3 split doses and total quantity of P &
K as basal dose.
To manage fungal diseases, treat the seed with Vitavax power @
2 g/kg seed and for termite control with Fipronil 5 SC @ 8 ml/kg
seed.
Fenugreek (Methi)
A Rabi season seed spice crop & cultivated in many districts of the
state. Soil & climatic conditions of the state are favourable for its
better growth & higher yield. Being a leguminous seed spice crop,
it improves soil fertility also.
Improved varieties: RMt-1, RMt-305, AFg-1, Afg-3
Sowing Time: 2nd fortnight of October month.
Seed Rate: 20-25 kg/ha
Manure & fertilizers: should be applied as per soil testing report
& if soil testing report is not available than apply 8-10 ton well
decomposed FYM/ha, if available and mix properly in the soil
before sowing. Use chemical fertilizers @ 20 Kg N, 40 Kg P & 250
Kg gypsum/ha. In zinc deficient areas apply 25 kg Zinc Sulphate /
ha. Use total quantity of N in 2 split doses and total quantity of P
& K as basal dose.
Treat the seed with Carbendezim 50WP @ 2 g/Kg seed for control
of fungal diseases and followed by insecticide & Rhizobium culture.
90
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Other activities to be performed:
To achieve higher water use efficiency (WUE) of available irrigation
water, especially in canal area, land should be levelled with Laser
Land Leveller before sowing of Rabi season crops.
Collect, Harvest & Conserve maximum rainwater as much as
possible in Farm Pond or Plastic based water pond and minimize
the losses of conserved rainwater for life saving irrigation on
different critical stages during moisture deficit conditions, to
achieve higher productivity level.
As per availability of resources, prepare proper work plan for
sustainable farming/ organic farming/ Paramparagat Krishi in
Rabi season and for this nearby KVK may help you in providing
proper advisory and guidance.
Adopt appropriate IFS Models as per availability of different
resources, infrastructure, and facilities on their farm.
Eligible farmers register themselves for Pradhanmantri Fasal
Bima Yojna (PMFBY) benefits, to minimize the risk from natural
calamities.
Horticultural Crops
Fruit crops
Ber
Recommended varieties: Seb, Gola, Umran, Ilaichi, Kaithali,
Mundiya
General Management of orchard:
Orchard should be clean and weed free.
To get higher fruit yield it is recommended to place two
honeybee colonies or hive/Acre in September month for
better pollination because honey bees play important role in
pollination. Irrigation should be applied regularly at 10-15
days’ interval.
91
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Plants should be covered with Kheenp (Leptadenia
pyrotechnica) or Munja grass (Saccharum munja) during
the December month to protect from frost. Intercultural
operations should be done regularly in orchards.
Foliar spray with Gibberellic acid 80 ppm during October and
December month increases fruit size and stop fruit dropping.
Nutrient Management:
Apply pyrite or gypsum @ 6-8 kg/pit according to soil pH.
Nitrogenous fertilizer should be applied in two spilt doses, first
dose should be applied during July- August and remaining
half dose of Nitrogen fertilizer should be applied during the
fruit setting in the month of October-November.
Need to apply light irrigation after application of fertilizers.
Post flowering irrigation management:
Need to be apply light irrigations during the September-
October month at 10 days’ interval (flowering started in
September month and fruit setting completed in October
month).
Irrigation should be stopped before 15 days of fruit ripening
or maturity to harvest good quality fruits and helpful in
reducing the problems like delayed maturity, fruit cracking,
disease problem etc.
There is need to regular intercultural operations after every
irrigation to maintain soil moisture. Mulching with black
polythene or organic mulch with dried plant material like
buee or sarkanda or wheat straw to maintain the soil moisture.
Foliar spray should be done with Kaolin 7.5% which is helpful
in checking of evapotranspiration from plants.
Insect-pest and disease management advisories:
It is advised for soil racking to expose the pupae of fruit fly.
There is chance of powdery mildew in October month, apply
foliar spray of Kerathan @ 1ml/lit. water or Carbendazim
92
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
(Bavstin) @ 0.05% or Sulphur powder @ 0.2% at the time
of pea size fruiting and spray should be repeated at 15 days’
interval to manage powdery mildew disease.
Foliar spray with fungicide Hexaconazol 5% SC or
propiconazole 5% SC @ 1ml/lit water to manage fruit rotting
and black leaf spot of leaves.
To manage fruit fly install Methyl eugenol trap @ 6 trap/Acre,
use fruit fly resistant varieties namely Safeda, Umran, Ilaichi,
Sanaur-1 and foliar spray with poison bait (100g Jaggery or
molasses+2ml deltamethrin 2.8EC in one-liter water) on
tree trunk at weekly interval. Foliar spray with Azadirachtin
(0.3%) @ 2.5 ml or Chloropyriphos 20 EC @ 2ml/liter water
at the time of pea size fruiting also help in managing fruit fly.
For termite management avoid application of undecomposed
FYM, drench with Chloropyriphos 20 EC @ 1ml/ liter water if
termite infestation observed.
Citrus
For managing Citrus canker apply Streptocycline @ 250/100 water
and NSKE @ 5kg/100 lit. water.
For the management of leaf minor spray with Rogor or Metasystox
@ 300 ml/100 lit water
Fruit dropping is a serious problem before harvesting, hence foliar
spray should be done with 10 ppm 2,4-D (1g/100 lit. water)
Apply third dose of nitrogenous fertilizer during September month.
During October, to fulfill the requirement of micronutrients apply
zinc sulphate, magnesium sulphate, boric acid and slacked lime
(each @ 1kg/450 lit. water), apply 500 ppm Streptocycline if citrus
canker damage is observed during this month.
During October at least one intercultural operation should be done
in citrus orchards.
For the management of Gummosis problem in December month, it
93
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
is advised to scrap the gum from bark of the affected parts and apply
paste of Bordeaux mixture (1:2:20 ratio), in severe incidence soil
drenching with matalaxyl or foliar spray with Fosetyl-Aluminum
is recommended.
Fruits orchard should be clean and weed free.
Papaya
In papaya nursery raising and planting at 2.5 m row and 1.6 m
spacing is recommended for higher yields and income.
Aonla
In Aonla regular orchard cleaning, irrigation and fruit drop can be
managed by spray of borax 6g/ liter water.
Guava
In Guava application of manure and fertilizer and regular cleaning
and irrigation in orchard. In this season harvesting the fruit and
protect plants from stem and fruit borer pest.
Pomegranate
In Pomegranate harvest Mrig Bahar fruits and protect the plant
from fruit rotting, leaf and fruit spot disease.
Lasora
In Gunda (Lasora) orchard cleaning should be done and defoliate
the leaves for early fruiting.
Sapota
In Sapota flowering start in September to October, so orchard
should be kept clean and after fruit setting application of fertilizer
and regular irrigation should be initiated.
94
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed Spices
Cumin
Recommended varieties: Cumin- GC-4 and RZ-223
Seed rate and sowing: 12-15 kg seed/ha, sowing of cumin should be
done in the second fortnight of October and up to 05th November
in line with Row-to-row distance of 30 cm.
Soil and field preparation: Sandy and sandy loam soils are suitable
for cumin cultivation. Field should be prepared well with help of
cultivator and harrow
Nutrient management: FYM @ 10-15 ton/ha, 20 kg P, 10 kg ZnSO4
and 15 kg K should be applied before sowing during the field
preparation and 30 kg Nitrogen fertilizer should be applied in two
split doses; first dose before sowing and remaining second dose 30-
35 DAS with the light irrigation. It is also recommended to apply
microgranular mixture of Sulphur 67 WG+ 14% Zn @ 10 kg/ha
and top dressing with Sulphur 90% WG @ 7.5 kg/ha to get more
seed yield.
Soil treatment: Soil application of Trichoderma viridae @ 2.5 kg /
ha mixed with 100 kg FYM or 250 kg castor cake or 250 kg Neem
cake before sowing.
Seed treatment: Seed treatment with Trichoderma viridae @ 10g/
kg seed or carbendazim 2g/kg seed for the management of fungal
diseases. For management of the sucking insects like aphids, thrips
etc. seed treatment with Imidacloprid 70 WP @ 7.5g/kg seed is
advised.
Intercropping and interculture: Due to risky nature of cumin, it is
advised to adopt intercropping of cumin and Isabgol in 4:4 ratios.
Two interculture (hoeing and weeding) operations required; first at
30-35 DAS and second at 55-60 DAS.
Irrigation management: Light irrigation should be applied just after
sowing and second irrigation apply after 7 days of first, subsequently
irrigations should be applied at 15-25 days’ interval. During grain
95
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
formation stage last irrigation should be given with full amount of
water and no need to apply irrigation at maturity stage.
Insect-pest management:
Aphids: Installation of yellow sticky traps @ 10-12 trap/ha
followed by foliar spray with neem oil 3000 ppm @ 3ml/lit.
water or NSKE 5% or Imidacloprid 17.8 SL @ 0.3ml/lit. water
Powdery mildew: dusting with sulphur powder @ 25 kg/ha in
morning hours is recommended followed by foliar spray with
Kerathan (Dinocap) @ 1ml/lit. water at 10-15 days’ interval
Blight: Advised to foliar spray with fungicide propiconazole or
hexaconazole 5% SC @ 1ml/lit. water
Wilt: it is a serious disease in cumin, follow seed treatment
and soil treatment with Trichoderma and Bavstin before
sowing as suggested above
Moisture level of seeds should be maintained below 8.5-9 per
cent for long storage
Coriander
Recommended varieties: Ajmer coriander-1, 2 & 3, Gujarat
Coriander-4, Pusa selection 360, Hisar Sugandh, Hisar Anand,
RCr-20, 41 & 436
Soils and field preparation: In irrigated conditions sandy to sandy
loam soils and in rainfed conditions heavy black soils with increased
water holding capacity are suitable for coriander cultivation. Field
should be deep ploughed once with disc plough, subsequently 2-3
times ploughing with the help of cultivator and harrow
Manure & fertilizers:
FYM @ 10-12 ton/ha,
For irrigated conditions: 60 kg N: 30 P: 20 kg K and 10 kg
ZnSO4
For Rainfed conditions: 30 kg N; 30 kg P
Full dose of phosphorus and potash, one third dose of nitrogen
96
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
should be applied before sowing during the field preparation
and remaining nitrogenous fertilizer should be applied in two
split doses: first dose before sowing and remaining second
dose 30-35 DAS with the light irrigation.
Soil treatment: Soil application of Trichoderma viridae @ 2.5 kg /
ha mixed with 100 kg FYM or 250 kg castor cake or 250 kg Neem
cake before sowing.
Recommended Seed rate and sowing: 10-12 kg seed/ha for irrigated
and 12-15 Kg/ha for rainfed/partially irrigated conditions. Suitable
sowing time is ranges from 15th October to 15th November, it
should be done on or before 15th November. Row to row distance:
30-45 cm in line sowing
Seed treatment: Advised to Seed treatment with Trichoderma viridae
@ 10 g/kg seed or carbendazim 2g/kg seed for the management of
fungal diseases, also advised to seed treatment with Imidacloprid
70 WP @ 7.5g/kg seed to manage the sucking insects like aphids,
thrips etc.
Irrigation management: Light irrigation should be applied just
after sowing and second irrigation apply after 7-10 days of first,
subsequently irrigations should be applied at 15-25 days’ interval.
4-6 irrigation in light soils and 3-4 irrigations in heavy soils are
sufficient to achieve good production of this crop.
interculture operations: Two interculture (hoeing and weeding)
operations required; first interculture at 30-35 DAS and 60-65 DAS.
Plant protection measures:
Growing castor or marigold as a trap crop for the management
of Spodoptera.
Plant tall border crops like maize, sorghum for the management
of mites, aphid and thrips.
Crop rotation of non-host crops like cereal crops for 3 years
must be followed.
Aphid and thrips: Installation of yellow and blue sticky traps
97
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
@ 10-12 trap/ha each followed by foliar spray with neem oil
3000 ppm @4ml/lit. water or NSKE 5% or Imidacloprid 17.8
SL @ 0.3ml/lit. or acephate 75 SP @ 1.5 ml/lit. water
Seed midge: foliar spray with neem oil 3000 ppm @4ml/lit.
water or NSKE 5% or methyl-O-demeton 25 EC @ 1ml/lit.
water
Powdery mildew: Dusting with Sulphur dust @ 20-25 kg/ha in
morning hours is recommended followed by foliar spray with
Kerathan (Dinocap) @ 1ml/lit. water at 10-15 days’ interval,
harvesting of the mature crop should not be delayed avoiding
powdery mildew attack.
Blight: cloudy weather and high humidity at flowering stage
is favourable for this disease, advised to foliar spray with
fungicide propiconazole or hexaconazole 5% SC @ 1ml/lit.
water at 15 days’ interval.
Wilt: Follow seed treatment and soil treatment with
Trichoderma or Bavstin before sowing as suggested above
Stem gall disease: Use stem gall resistant variety Ajmer
coriander-1 in affected areas, use of healthy seeds for sowing
and seed treatment with carbendazim (Bavstin) @ 2g/kg seed
and foliar spray with carbendazim @ 1g/lit. or hexaconazole 5
SC @ 1ml/lit. water
Frost management: this crop is very sensitive to frost, during
the chances of frosting apply light irrigation and foliar spray
with sulfuric acid 0.1% at midnight to escape crop form the
frost.
Storage: Moisture level of seeds should be maintained below
8.5-9 per cent for long period storage.
Fennel
Cool and dry weather is favourable for this crop and optimum
temperature for germination (20-29o Celsius) and for growth (15-
20 o Celsius) is required.
98
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Recommended varieties: Ajmer fennel-1, Ajmer fennel-2,
Ajmer fennel-3, Gujarat fennel-1, Gujarat fennel-12, Rajasthan
Fennel-125, 143 & 157, Hisar Swaroop, G.F.- 11
Soils and field preparation: sandy loam, loamy and black soils with
good drainage containing enough organic carbon are suitable for
this crop. Field should be deep ploughed once with disc plough,
subsequently 2-3 times ploughing with the help of cultivator and
harrow
Manure & fertilizers: FYM @ 10-15 ton/ha, bio-fertilizers like
azotobacter and PSB culture @ 5kg/ha, 250 kg gypsum, 90 kg N: 40
P: 30 kg K and 10 kg ZnSO4 recommended, full dose of phosphorus
and potash, one third dose of nitrogen should be applied before
sowing during the field preparation and remaining nitrogenous
fertilizer should be applied in two split doses; first dose apply one
month later of sowing or transplanting and remaining second dose
apply at flowering stage with the light irrigation.
99
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Soil treatment: Soil application of Trichoderma viridae @ 2.5 kg /
ha mixed with 100 kg FYM or 250 kg castor cake or 250 kg Neem
cake before sowing.
Recommended Seed rate and sowing: 8-10 kg seed/ha for direct
seeding and 1.5-2 kg in nursery for one ha area transplanting is
sufficient. In direct seeding First week of October best for sowing
of this crop. Row to row distance of 40-45 cm and Plant to plant
distance of 15-20 cm should have kept in direct seeding method.
Seed treatment: Advised to Seed treatment with Trichoderma @
10g/kg seed or carbendazim 2g/kg seed for the management of
fungal diseases, also advised to seed treatment with Imidacloprid
70 WP @ 7.5g/kg seed to manage the sucking insects like aphids,
thrips etc.
Nursery management: An area of 100 m2 is sufficient for one ha
transplanting, beds of 2x3 m prepared and incorporate 15-20 FYM,
2 kg DAP, 500 g urea and 500 g folidol powder per bed, seed should
be shown in 20 cm row to row distance during the 15th of July to
15th August; transplanting should be done after 45 to 60 days.
Irrigation: Light irrigation should be applied just after sowing or
transplanting and thereafter 6-8 irrigations should be applied at 15-
25 days’ interval. At flowering and seed formation stage irrigation
must be necessary for getting higher yield.
Interculture operations: Two interculture (hoeing and weeding)
operations required; first interculture at 25-30 DAS and 60 days
after sowing or transplanting, thinning should be practiced at the
time of first interculture if required.
Plant protection measures:
Growing castor or marigold as a trap crop for the management
of Spodoptera.
Plant tall border crops like maize, sorghum for the management
of mites, aphid, and thrips.
100
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Follow crop rotation of non-host crops like cereal crops for 3
years.
Aphid and thrips: Installation of yellow and blue sticky traps
@ 10-12 trap/ha each followed by foliar spray with neem oil
3000 ppm @4ml/lit. water or NSKE 5% or Imidacloprid 17.8
SL @ 0.3ml/lit. or acephate 75 SP @ 1.5 ml/lit. water
Seed midge: foliar spray with neem oil 3000 ppm @4ml/lit.
water or NSKE 5% or methyl-O-demeton 25 EC @ 1ml/lit.
water
Powdery mildew: Dusting with Sulphur dust @ 20-25 kg/ha in
morning hours is recommended followed by foliar spray with
Kerathan (Dinocap) @ 1ml/lit. water at 10-15 days’ interval,
harvesting of the mature crop should not be delayed avoiding
powdery mildew attack.
Blight: cloudy weather and high humidity at flowering stage
is favourable for this disease, advised to foliar spray with
fungicide propiconazole or hexaconazole 5% SC @ 1ml/lit.
water at 15 days’ interval.
Wilt: Follow seed treatment and soil treatment with
Trichoderma or Bavstin before sowing as suggested above
Gummosis disease: Use healthy seeds for sowing, seeds
should be treatment and crop rotation should be followed to
minimize this problem
Root and stem rot disease: stem and root rotting is a common
symptom of this disease, small and big size sclerotia seen on
the roots. Disease can be controlled by seed treatment with
carbendazim or bavstin @ 2g or Trichoderma @ 10 g/kg seed
and crop rotation of 3 years.
Frost management: this crop is very sensitive to frost, during
the chances of frosting apply light irrigation and foliar spray
with sulfuric acid 0.1% at midnight to escape crop form the
frost.
101
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Storage: Moisture level of seeds should be maintained below
8.5-9 per cent for long storage
Vegetable crops cultivation
Sowing and cultivation of vegetable Pea/ Beetroot/ Brinjal/
Cabbage/ Cauliflower (Mid and late)/ Carrot/ Potato/ Palak/
Onion/ Radish/ Tomato/ Fenugreek/ Coriender/ Green onion/
Garlic/ Mustard leaves in September-October month.
Sowing the seed after seed treatment with improved method for
good germination and reduce time and cost of cultivation.
Adopt crop rotation, select healthy and resistant varieties, deep
ploughing of field can reduce the major leaf curl virus problem in
chilli, Brinjal, Tomato and Potato.
Manage Termite in soil-by-soil solarisation, summer ploughing
and application of chloropyriphos powder @ 25 kg/ha and pest like
fruit borer, stem borer, caterpillar, leaf minor, fruit fly etc. can be
managed by regular spray of neem oil and other broad-spectrum
insecticides.
Transplanting of Mid and late cauliflower and cabbage/Tomato/
Chilli/ Brinjal/ Onion vegetables in the month of October-
November.
Recommended varieties of various vegetable crops:
Tomato: Arka Rakshak, Hisar Lalit, Pusa Ruby, Pusa-120,
Best of all, Pusa Gaurav. Farmers are advised to adopt Triple
resistant (resistant to leaf curl virus, bacterial blight, and early
blight diseases) tomato variety ‘Arka Rakshak’ developed by
IIHR, Bangalore to get more production.
Vegetable Pea: Bonneville, Azad P-3, Kashi Mattar, Arkel
Carrot: Pusa Kesar, Pusa Meghali, Pusa Rudhira
Radish: Pusa Chetki
Onion: Pusa White Flat, Pusa White Round, Pusa Red, Pusa
Ratnar
102
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Cabbage: Golden Acre, Pusa Drumhead
Brinjal: Pusa purple long, Pusa purple Cluster, Pusa Purple
Round, Pusa Snowball-1, Pusa Snowball-2
Recommended seed rate and nursery raising:
Tomato: 400-500 g (for Hybrid 125-150 g);
Chili: 500 g (200g for Hybrid);
Brinjal: 500 g (200g for Hybrid);
Cauliflower & Cabbage: 400-500 g; seed required for raising of
seedlings in nursery for one ha area transplanting.
It is advised to adopt line sowing (keep row to row distance 5-10
cm with 0.5-1.0 cm depth) method for nursery raising for vigorous
seedling production.
Advised to practice seed treatment with bio-pesticides like
Trichoderma @ 10g/ kg seed for the management of soil borne
fungal diseases, imidacloprid 70 WP @ or Thiamethoxam 30 FS
@ 7-8 g/kg seed to manage the sucking insects in nursery as well
as field.
Farmers are advised to adopt raised bed planting system for
vegetables. It provides low risk to water lodging sensitive crops,
more saving of water (about 36% water saving compared to flood
irrigation), more aeration for plant roots, more stability to plants
and low incidence of diseases & weeds.
Drip irrigation should be adopted by all vegetable growers to get
higher yield with more water saving and low risk of insect-pests
and diseases.
Mulching: farmers are advised to adopt mulching in raised bed
planting system, mulching can be done with black polyethene
sheet or rice straw, wheat straw etc. which helps in 30-50% water
saving, low incidence of insect-pests and diseases.
Advised to adopt balanced fertilization, should be focused on
micronutrient mixture like ‘Kashi Sukshmshakti’ to get higher
production due to low risk of physical disorders, diseases etc.
103
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Advised to follow Integrated Pest Management instead of
chemical dependency, the following steps should be undertaken-
Cultural control: deep summer ploughing, follow 2–3-year
crop rotation, timely sowing, or transplanting, use of well
decomposed FYM, field should be neat and clean etc.
Mechanical control: Installation of light traps for collecting
phototropic insects, pheromone traps for the purpose of mass
collection, mating disruption and monitoring, pheromone
lures are available for tomato fruit borer, brinjal shoot & fruit
borer, okra shoot and fruit borer, tobacco caterpillar etc.,
remove disease affected plants and destroy them to check the
further spread (this practice most effective in virus affected
plants), erection of bird perches @ 50-60/ha to increase
predation of insects by birds
104
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Biological control:
Focus should be given on conservation of natural
enemies and ensure regular releases of egg parasitoid
Trichogramma sp.
Also advised to apply Trichoderma viridae @ 5kg/
ha mixed with 100 kg FYM to manage the soil borne
diseases.
Foliar spray with Beauveria bassiana or verticillium @
2-4 kg/ ha with 400-500 lit. water to manage the sucking
insect problem in vegetables.
Advised to foliar spray of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt.) @
1 liter per hectare for the management of lepidopteran
insect-pests.
Also advised to use HaNPV @ 250-500 LE/ ha to manage
the tomato fruit borer, Helocoverpa armigera.
Advised to more focus on non-chemical method of
insect-pest management in vegetables to avoid hazardous
effects of chemical pesticides, botanicals are also an
important component of IPM as suggested below- Foliar
spray with NSKE 5% or Neem oil 2% or Azadirachtin
3000ppm @ 3ml/lit. water is effective against different
insect-pests.
Chemical control:
It is advised to use Ridomil M.Z. @ 2.5/lit. or Copper
Oxy chloride @ 3kg/ 1000 lit. water to manage the foliar
diseases in different vegetables.
To manage the viral diseases like leaf curl virus, yellow
vein clearing virus, mosaic virus farmers should ensure
the removal of Dhatura and Makoy weed plant from the
field, adopt virus resistant varieties like ‘Arka Rakshak’
and practiced foliar spray with systemic insecticide like
Malathion 50 EC @ 1ml/lit. water or Imidacloprid 17.8 SL
@ 0.3ml/lit. water to manage the vector of such viruses.
105
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
More focus should be given on new molecules like
Spinosad 45 SL @ 200-250 ml/ha or Emamectin benzoate
5 SG 500 ml/ha or Indoxacarb 14.5 EC @ 200 ml/ha to
manage the shoot and fruit borer and defoliator insects
in tomato, brinjal, chili, okra etc.
Mites also cause significant damage in vegetables, foliar
spray with Sulphur 80 WDG @ 2g/lit. and Dicofol @
2ml or Abametin @ 0.5ml or Spiromesifen @1 ml or
Chlorofenpyr @1ml per litre water effective against mites.
Nematode management in vegetables: Nematode is a serious
problem in vegetables like tomato, brinjal, okra, chilli, potato
etc. Farmers are advised to adopt integrated management as
suggested below-
Crop rotation, deep summer ploughing (May-June) of
field followed soil solarization by covering the soil with
black polyethene sheet for 4-5 weeks, soil application with
Paecillomyces lilacinus @ 5kg/ha mixed with 100 kg FYM or
2.5 tone neem or castor cake to before sowing or transplanting.
Soil also can be treated with the application of carbofuran 3G
@ 25 kg/ha.
Use of nematode resistant varieties:
Tomato: Hisar Lalit, Nematex, Pusa-120, Ronita,
Kalyanpur-1, 2,3, Slecon-120, Hilani, Arka Vardan, Arka
Rakshak
Brinjal: Black beauty, Vijaya, Banaras, Jaint
Chili: Pusa Jwala, N.P.-46-A, Mohini, K-2, C.A. 1366,
C.A. 2123
Okra: I.C. 9773, I.C. 18960
Flower cultivation
Training and pruning of rose should be done and spray of Diethane
M-45@ 2 g/litre of water at cut portion.
106
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sowing of gladiolus bulb after treatment of bulb with 2g per litre
Bavistin solution for 10-15 minute.
Sowing of winter annuals for decorative and commercial purpose
in the month of September -October.
Advisory for Animal Husbandry
October Month
Cattles and Buffalo
The month of October witnesses the onset of the winter season and
in some areas, there are cold storms accompanied with rain. At
such times the cattle and buffalo should be protected against illness
caused due to cold weather.
Make adequate arrangements to protect the animals from winter.
Animal shed should be repaired before starting the winter season
to protect from cold.
Vaccinate the animals for Foot and Mouth Disease in this month.
Start feeding of more roughages (like hay, straws, etc.) or forages to
maintain the milk production and body heat of the dairy animals.
Provide additional quantity of grains like maize, wheat, oats, or
readily available whole grains to animals for meeting their energy
requirements which generally increases during winters.
For proper elimination of ammonia, livestock waste and other
disease-causing pathogens, it is advisable to clean shed twice a day.
It will also enhance ventilation in the shed.
For better drainage of urine and other excretions, maintain proper
alleys and drains. Wet floor may lead to diarrhea, fever, pneumonia,
coccidiosis, hypothermia leading to death, etc. Young animals are
at higher risk of developing disease due to wet floors.
Clean animals with cloth during winters or simply give them
grooming once a day to remove dirt and dust.
Avoid the usage of water. If there is imminent need of using water
107
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
to clean animals, do it in the afternoon or hotter hours of the day.
Clean animals immediately with cloth to prevent heat loss.
Deworming of animals should be done at regular intervals. It is
advisable to repeat deworming after 21 days of the first dose to
prevent worms and their larvae from development.
Mineral mixture and other supplements must be started to animal
in this season.
Sheep and Goat
The floor should be non-slippery and be covered with hay, husk,
straws, etc. for insulation. Slippery floors lead to fracture of long
bones in goats.
Provide enough space in shed for all goats to be together safely.
Provide a bedding of about 2 to 4 inches to prevent heat loss due
to conduction. Haystack beds are admired by goats as they are soft
and warm.
Lice and mites are increasingly prevalent during the winter months.
High infestations can cause anemia, poor coat and skin quality. Use
of permethrins and pyrethrins is advisable as de-lousing agents.
Ivermectin with recommendation from veterinarian can be used.
Sheep and goat farmers should take special care of the body
condition score of the meat animals much before the onset of
winters. Animals with better body condition score have better
insulation and do not readily lose heat.
During winters, it is paramount to keep the barn dry and regularly
trim the hooves to avoid problems such as foot scald or foot rot.
The breeding males should be given an extra allowance of
concentrate feed particularly grains during the mating period.
Deworm the animals at regular intervals. It is advisable to
repeat deworming after every 3-month completion of previous
deworming.
108
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Poultry
Poultry house should be designed in such a way to provide all the
comfort required by birds during winter.
An east-west alignment of a rectangular house provides a maximum
gain of solar energy in winter.
House should be designed in a way that maximum sun light enters
the shed during daytime.
Birds should be protected from chilled winds, for this gunny bags
should be hanged at the places from where the cold air enters.
These gunny bags should be hanged down as soon as sunlight goes
in the evening till the arrival of sunlight next morning.
November Month
Cattle and Buffalo
This month is indication of starting the low environmental
temperature compared to normal days.
In case of loose housing system, use curtains around the animal
house. The curtains can be made from tarpaulin, bamboo, dry
grass, paddy straw, jute bags, guinea bags, etc.
Reduce humidity to ensure better ventilation, preventing excessive
moisture in sheds, roof dripping and ground freezing phenomenon.
Hypothermia is a major risk in this season for neonatal calves,
and housing, feeding, and hydration are key considerations for
minimizing hypothermia.
Lukewarm water should be provided for drinking purpose.
Calves should be fed with more milk. Increase the feedings per day
from two to three times, while holding the amount per feeding the
same.
Cold weather increases feeding needs of animals.
Deworm the calves at regular intervals
109
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To prevent mastitis, continue to dip the teat in potassium
permanganate after every milking for whole of the season.
Maintain heat detection as a priority particularly in buffaloes for
natural or artificial insemination.
Vaccinate the animals for foot and mouth disease, if not vaccinated
previously.
Sheep and Goats
In severe cold weather, goats can crowd together for warmth, but
this increases the likelihood of injury and respiratory diseases, so
prepare a good shed for them before winter season.
Sheep and goats should be dewormed multiple times a year to guard
against stomach and round worms. Deworming should be done
in November or December, and in the cases of high parasite load,
deworm again 30 days later to break the lifecycle of the stomach
worms and round worms.
Sheep and goats tend to gain more weight during winters; therefore,
care should be taken to provide them with sufficient ration and
pastures for grazing or browsing.
Lukewarm water should be provided for drinking purpose,
especially to kid/lamb.
Animals that have no shelter in winter season provide 30 percent
more feed per day than animals that have access to shelter from
the wind.
Poultry
Around 6 inches of litter is needed in poultry houses during
winter. The litter gives warmth to the birds during winter.
If litter management is proper, it will be felt quite warm when taken
in hand. Litter can be made from straw, sawdust, or wood shavings
to the floor. Not only will this provide insulation for the birds’ feet,
but it will absorb feces better and is easier to clean.
110
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Birds release a lot of moisture in their breath and droppings which
adversely affects their health, if there is restricted ventilation; it
causes ammonia to build up in the air which causes respiratory
problems. Ensure the supply of fresh air circulating around the
house.
Maintain the proper ventilation in poultry house. Keep the curtain
open in the daytime.
There should also be arrangement of exhaust fans to remove
impure air.
Deworming of chicks should be carried out with piprazine mixed
in drinking water.
To protect chickens from winter, Gunny bags/sacks should be
planted around the farm.
December Month
Cattle and Buffalo
This month have very cold environment, so provide a shelter for
cattle and buffalo to get them out of the elements.
Providing deep, clean, dry bedding is essential to keep the animals
warm.
An animal’s nutrient requirements also go up as the temperature
drops, especially in wet conditions followed by extreme cold. Feed
more roughages (like hay, straws, etc.) or forages (Berseem) to
maintain the milk production and body heat of the dairy animals.
Roughages are generally preferable over concentrates due to their
lower cost and greater heat release during digestion.
If the grains are costly or not available, then the use of oil
cakes such as mustard oil cake, cotton seed cake, etc. can be fed.
Seed cakes suffice the protein requirements of the animal and
boost production.
Cattle and buffalo need more calories to keep themselves warm,
especially cattle with less than moderate body condition.
111
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Keep a close eye on your herd to watch for additional signs of
stress caused by cold weather. Older animal, animal with previous
health issues and calves are the groups most susceptible to the cold
weather.
Provide lukewarm water for drinking purpose.
Drop off milk samples for culture if cattle are having mastitis issues.
Sheep and Goat
Goats are the hardy animals possessing thick coat of hairs
and require least to be look after in winters. However, a night
shelter should be provided to house goats to prevent them from
chilling winds.
Kid/lamb born in winter is more prone to cold stress or hypothermia.
Bedding should be provided to protect them from cold floor.
Young stock should be provided with protective shedding to
prevent heat loss from the body and providing warmth which can
be made from gunny bags, sacks, blankets, etc.
During harsh winters, adult animals should also be covered for
preventing heat loss.
Foot health is an extremely important part of sheep and goat care.
The animals dwelling in muddy or wet conditions are susceptible
to cracked and bruised feet and can suffer from foot rot and warts.
It can be more difficult to observe foot ailments during the winter
season, thus, checking feet should be a part of winter chore routine.
Use of zinc sulphate and copper sulphate for foot dips is advised.
Sheep and goats require at least 4 hours of sunlight for keeping
their body warm; therefore, exposure to sunlight in sunny days is
important.
The act of delivering offspring in sheep and goats generally takes
place during late night to early morning in winters. Therefore, for
newly born kids and lambs, keep soft bedding in the farm at some
dry and warm higher place so that immediately after birth, they
may be taken care of.
112
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Provide lukewarm water for drinking purpose because cold water
may lead to digestive troubles.
Poultry
Low temperature causes more feed intake and higher oxygen
demand. Therefore, when the weather gets colder, it is essential to
give the chicken plenty of food as they require extra energy for
maintaining body temperature.
In winter number of feeders should be increased as compared to
summer. Feed should be available to the bird whole of the day.
Consider rubbing chickens’ wattles and combs with petroleum
jelly to provide a barrier against the cold and protect them from
frostbite.
Provide continuous supply of fresh and clean lukewarm water to
birds.
Daily monitoring of temperature, humidity and ventilation inside
the poultry house as well as outside temperature is recommended.
Too high or too low a temperature in brooder house slows down
growth and causes mortality.
January Month
Cattle and Buffalo
This month also have very cold environment so keep continue with
provide a shelter for cattle and buffalo.
Animal feeding continue with roughages preferable over
concentrates due to their lower cost and greater heat release during
digestion.
Use of oil cakes in the recommended quantities, such as mustard
oil cake, cotton seed cake, etc. can be fed.
Continue with your calf deworming programme
Keep continue a close eye on herd to watch for signs of stress
caused by cold weather.
113
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Drinking water should be heated to 10°C to ensure proper water
intake.
Sheep and Goat
All suggestions provided during the last month for protection of
the animals against cold and inclement weather may be practiced
this month too.
Neonant should be provided with protective clothing to prevent
heat loss from the body and providing warmth which can be made
from gunny bags, sacks, blankets, etc.
Sheep require more energy in the winter to maintain body
temperature. Utilize average- to good-quality hays during the
early gestation period, when ewe nutrient requirements are low
compared to late gestation and lactation.
Lambs and kids should be vaccinated to prevent Enterotoxaemia.
If animals are already consuming their maximum amount of dry
matter and are still losing body condition, some roughage will have
to be replaced with a more energy-dense feed, such as a grain.
Vaccinate the animals for pox disease in this month.
Poultry
Many of vaccines/medicine/vitamins are given to poultry through
water and as the water consumption of bird is reduced during winter
season, therefore, care should be taken that waterers are removed
few hours prior to watering and ample amount of medication is
added so that each bird gets benefit of medicine/vaccine or other
supplements.
If still in the month of January the birds huddle together in the
farm, this indicates that the ambient temperature of the farm is
low and heaters, bulbs and bukharis should be used to increase the
temperature.
In layer farms, add a supplemental light, if you want to increase egg
production throughout the cold weather.
114
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
February Month
Cattle and Buffalo
The controlled breeding programme for animals should continue
in the month of February so that all participating animals become
pregnant during this month.
All new-born animals should be dewormed.
To prevent mastitis in dairy cattle, they should be milked completely.
Berseem and Alfalfa should be dried and stored as dry fodder for
use during times of low or no green fodder availability.
Sheep and Goat
All suggestions provided during the last month for protection of
the animals against cold and inclement weather may be practiced
this month too because cold still present in this month.
Lambs/kids should be vaccinated against PPR.
Deworming should be done in this month also, in cases of high
parasitic load.
Poultry
As low temperature causes more feed intake and higher oxygen
demand, provide adlib feed to the birds for rapid weight gain and
egg production.
If water is cold enough, then it should be given to chicken
after adding hot water to it, so that the water comes to normal
temperature.
Store feed in dry place so that it may not get in contact with
moisture.
If birds fall sick, contact local veterinarian.
115
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
HARyANA ANd deLHI
Wheat, chickpea, barley, and mustard are main Rabi season crops
grown by farmers in Haryana and Delhi States. Though, there has
been Substantive increase in the productivity of these crops, yet gap
persists between the yield realized by the farmers and average yield
of the improved varieties of these crops. For instance, productivity
of wheat in Haryana and Delhi is, less than average yield of wheat
varieties recommended for the states. Similar gaps have been registered
for mustard and chickpea crops. Several factors have been identified
which are responsible for this gap. Farmer’s reluctance in adoption
of improved practices of crop production is one of the main factors.
The crop advisory prepared for the Rabi season crops of Haryana and
Delhi States will be helpful for farmers in getting better crop harvest by
adoption of improved practices of crop production.
Mustard
October Month:
Time for sowing: Optimum time for sowing of mustard crop is from
30th September to 20th October.
Improved varieties
For irrigated conditions: RH-30, Uravarshi, RH-8812, RH-
0749, RH-9304, RB-50, Pusa Mustard-32 (Bio-fortified)
For rainfed conditions: RH-725, RB-50, RH-406, RH-0119
Seed rate & treatment: Seed rate of 3.5 kg/ha is required for irrigated
crop. Use 4.0 kg/ha seed for rained crop depending on availability
of moisture in the fields. Treat the seed with carbendazim (2.0 g/kg
seed) for management of stem rot disease.
Nutrient management: Apply 80 kg N, 30 kg P O , 20 kg K O and
2 5 2
25 Kg ZnSO (21%) per hectare in irrigated crop. Half dose of N
4
and full dose of P O , K 0 and ZnSO should be applied at the
2 5 2 4
time of sowing. Use preferably single super phosphate for meeting
116