ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
TeLANgANA
Rice
Select short duration varieties i.e., Talanaga Sona (RNR 15048),
Batukamma (JGL 18047), Kunaram Sannalu (KNM 118),
Tellahamsa (RNR 10754), Cottondora Sannalu (MTU 1010) and
Nelluri Mashuri (NLR 34449).
Treat the seed with Carbendazim @ 3 g. per kg of seed before
sowing. For Wet nursery, soak the seeds in Carbendazim solution
@ 1 g. per litre of water for 24 hours and sprouted seeds are
broadcasted into nursery plot.
For rabi puddled wet nursery, use sprouted rice seedlings. For 200
m2 nusrery apply additional 2 quintals of poultry manure or sheep
manure or vermicompost as basal along with recommended dose
of fertilizers (N and K). Double the dose of Phosphorus during
basal application.
To protect the nursery from severe cold, cover the nursery during
evening hours with polythene sheets or polywoven Urea bag sheets
supported by steel rods or bamboo sticks and remove the sheets
during morning.
To correct zinc deficiency, spray Zinc Sulphate @ 2g per liter of
water. Spray a combination of Carbendazim + Mancozeb 2g/ kg of
Urea whenever application of Urea is there. Irrigate the field during
evening hours and drain the water in the morning.
To control Blast in Rabi rice nurseries, spray Tricyclazole @ 0.6 g
per liter of water.
To control Stem borer, spray Cartap Hydrochloride 50 S.P @ 2 g. or
Chlorantriniliprole @ 0.3 ml per liter of water.
To control Leaf folder, spray Cartap hydrochloride @ 2 g. per litre
of water
365
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
To control Rice whorl maggot, spray Fipronil (5 SC) @ 2.5 ml per
liter water or apply Cartap Hydrochloride granules @ 8 kg per acre.
If False smut noticed, spray two times, Propiconazole @ 1 ml or
Carbendazim 50 WP @ 1 g. or Tebuconazole + Tryfloxystrobin 75
WG @ 0.4 g. per litre of water once at heading stage and again one
week after first spray.
To control Panicle mite, spray Dicofol @ 5ml + Propiconazole @
1 ml or Spiromesifen @ 1 ml + Propiconazole @ 1 ml per litre of
water.
To control Neck blast, spray Tricyclazole @ 0.6 g. or Isoprothiolane
@ 1.5 ml or Kasugamycin @ 2.5 ml per litre of water. Spray again
with an interval of 10-15 days based on severity of incidence and
prevailing environmental conditions.
If Sheath blight is noticed, spray Hexaconazole 5 E.C or 5 S.C @ 2ml
or Propiconazole @ 1 ml or Tebuconazole @ 1 ml + Tryfloxystrobin
75 WG @ 0.4 g. per litre of water two times at an interval of 15 days.
Maize
Recommended time of sowing October to November. In rice fallow
maize zero tillage system, up to December.
Use Medium duration (DHM 117, DHM 119, DHM 121, Bisco
855, Bio 9637, Karimnagar Makka 1, JKMH 4848, Karimnagar
Makka and Short duration hybrids (DHM-115, Pioneer 3342, KH
5991, DKC 7074 for profitable yields.
Time of sowing Yasangi: October to November. In rice fallow maize
zero tillage system, up to December is preferable.
Fertilizer requirement: 80-100 kg N, 32 kg P O , 32 kg K O per
2 5 2
acre is recommended. Nitrogen may be applied in four splits viz.,
at sowing, knee high stage (30-35 DAS), at flag leaf emergence (50-
55 DAS) and at tasseling-silking stage (60-65 DAS). Apply 20 kg of
Zinc sulphate per acre for every 2-3 seasons. If symptoms appear
later, the crop can be sprayed with 2 g/l solution of Zinc sulphate.
366
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Four to six irrigations are needed during the Yasangi season.
Two irrigations up to flowering at an interval of 20-25 days, one
at the time of flowering, two after flowering and one at the early
grain filling stage. If five irrigations are given, one irrigation at the
vegetative stage may be avoided and if only four irrigations are
given, one irrigation after the dough stage may be avoided. The
irrigation schedule may however be changed suitably based on the
soil conditions.
Integrated pest management is the best option for management
of FAW viz., summer ploughing, growing single cross hybrids,
clean cultivation, intercropping with pulses, balanced application
of fertilizers, release of egg parasitoids (Trichogrammasp) and as a
last resort spray Chlorantraniliprole @ 0.4 ml or Spinetoram @ 0.5
ml or Emamectin benzoate @ 0.4 g/l of water in plant whorls.
For Post Flowering Stalk Rots, invariably to go for crop rotation,
removing plant debris, summer ploughing, application of balanced
K fertilizer, avoiding moisture stress after flowering and growing
tolerant hybrids should be followed.
For zero tillage maize Dibble the seed after harvesting Vanakalam
rice at 2-3 cm depth, in optimum moisture, or else, give light
irrigation before dibbling depending on the soil type.
Spraying of Combination of Gramoxone 1.0 l/ac and Atrazine 1.0
kg/ac can also be used for controlling re-growth of rice stubbles
and broad-leaved weeds.
Groundnut
Seed treatment: Seed treatment with Tebuconazole @ 1g or
Mancozeb @ 3g per kg of seed. At places where stem rot is common,
treat the seeds with Imidacloprid (600 F.S) @ 1 ml in 7 ml of water
per kg of seed before sowing. Wherever severe root grub incidence
is common, seed treatment should be done with Chlorpyriphos
@ 6.5 ml before sowing. For newly sown Groundnut fields or
Groundnut sown under previous paddy fields, treat the seeds with
367
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Rhizobium culture @ 200 g. per kgs of seed for 1 acre. At places
where dry root rot and stem rot is common treat the seed with
Trichoderma @ 10 g. per kg of seed for better control.
For efficient weed control, spray pre-emergence herbicides such as
Alachlor @ 1litre or Pendimethalin (30% EC) @ 1.30-1.60 litres
per 200 liters of water, immediately after sowing or 2-3 days after
sowing. Inter cultivation should be done 25-30 days after sowing.
Maintain weed free conditions in the field up to 45 days after
sowing.
To control Spodoptera, install 4-5 Pheromone traps per acre. Spray
5% NSKE solution to control early-stage larvae. To control later
stage larvae spray Novaluron @ 200ml or Flubendiamide @ 400
ml per 200 liters of water per acre. Use Poison bait pellets prepared
with rice bran 5 kg + Jaggery 0.5 kg + 500 ml Monochrotophos and
broadcast them in field at evening hours.
To manage Tikka leaf spot, spray Chlorothalonil @ 400 g. or
Tebuconazole @ 200 ml per 200 litre per acre.
To control leaf folder Spray Chlorpyriphos @ 500 ml or Acephate
@ 300 g per 200 liters of water per acre.
Chickpea
Sowing should be done in rows with spacing of 30 x 10 cm to
maintain optimum plant population of 30-35 plants /sq.mt. to get
good yields.
Use of Wilt resistant varieties suitable for
mechanical harvesting JG-11, JAKI- 9218,
NBeG-3, NBeg-47.
Under late sowing situations, higher plant densities are
recommended upto 44 plants /m2 through increased seed rate and
zig zag sowings
Optimum time of sowing is October –November.
For the prevention of soil and seed borne diseases-damping off,
seed rot, wilt, dry root rot and better yield seed should be treated
368
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
with fungicides and antifungal bio agents. Captan or Thiram @ 3 g
or Mancozeb or Carbendazim @ 2.5 g per kg seed.
Pre emergence Spray of Pendimethalin @ 2.5 to 3.5 l/ha immediately
after sowing or within 24 hrs of sowing will be effective in
controlling the seasonal weeds.
Apply 20 kg N, 50 Kg P2O5, 40 kg S/ha as basal dose at the time
of last ploughing. Phosphate should be given in form of Super
phosphate.
One or two light irrigations at pre flowering at 30-35 days and seed
formation at 55-65 days will increase yields. Avoid water logging at
any cost as chickpea is very sensitive to poor soil aeration.
Foliar sprays of 2 % DAP or Urea at pre flowering stage will enhance
yields.
Spray Chloropyriphos @ 2.5 ml or Quinolphos @ 2.0ml/l for
control of leaf eating caterpillar.
Sesame
Sesame can be grown on a wide range of soils but well drained light
to medium textured soils is preferred.
Keep the field weed free and perfectly levelled to avoid water
logging to which sesame is highly sensitive.
For the prevention of seed borne diseases, use treated seed with
Carbendazim @ 3 g/kg of seed
Time of sowing for summer crop is January Second Fortnight to
February first fortnight.
The crop is very sensitive to weed competition during the first 20-
25 days. Two weedings, one after 15-20 days of sowing and other at
30-35 days after sowing are required to keep the field weed free and
to make moisture and nutrients available to the crop.
For Summer crop give the irrigation, immediately after sowing
to improve germination and plant establishment. The subsequent
irrigations may be given at an interval of 12-15 days depending on
369
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
the soil type, weather conditions and season. For good seed filling
and yield, irrigations at flower initiation and capsule formation are
essentially required.
Sunflower
Sunflower performs well on a wide range of soils such as sandy
loams, black soils and alluvials. It prefers mostly fertile, well-
drained neutral soils. It can tolerate slight alkaline conditions but
not acidity. Water logging areas should be avoided for its cultivation.
Light period of 8-10 hrs during flowering and seed filling stage
improves yield and oil content.
During Yasangi season and under Zero tillage conditions, optimum
sowing time is November- December. For Summer season 2nd
fortnight of January to 1st fortnight of February is optimum time.
Seed treatment with Thiomethaxom @ 3 gm / kg seed or
Imidacloprid @ 5 ml /kg seed can protect the crop against necrosis.
For the control of Alternaria leaf spot, seed treatment with
Iprodione 25% + Carbendazim 25 % @ 2 g per kg seed is to be
done.
For Weed control used pre-emergence application of Oxadiargil @
150g per acre within 24-48 hrs after sowing on wet soil.
Apply 5-7.5 tonnes of FYM/compost/ha 2-3 weeks prior to sowing.
It is desirable to apply fertilizers based on soil test values. Apply
50% N and 100% P & K as basal and remaining N as in two doses.
Apply Gypsum @ 55 kg/acre in sulphur deficit soils which improves
the oil content. Boron is an essential micronutrient for sunflower,
which increases seed filling and yield. Apply Borax @ 2g/l as
directed spray to capitulum at star bud stage. First dissolve borax
in hot water and make up to the required volume.
Bud initiation stage (35-40 DAS), flower opening stage (55-65
DAS) and seed filling stage (65-80 DAS) are the most critical stages
in sunflower. Moisture stress at these stages causes significant yield
reduction. During Yasangi season by adopting drip irrigation
370
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
method which can be scheduled for every 2-3 days can save 20-25
% of irrigation water.
When sunflower is raised in isolated areas, birds particularly
parrots pose serious problem. It is desirable to take up sunflower
cultivation in large continuous blocks of 20-25 acres. Crop should
be protected from seed filling to harvest through effective bird
scaring particularly in the morning and evening hours. Tying of
reflective ribbons above the crop will supplement the bird scaring.
Safflower
Safflower requires cool and dry climate during its entire growing
season. High temperatures at the time of flowering are harmful to
the crop. At all the stages of growth, excessive rainfall or humidity
increases the infestation of fungal diseases.
Some of the important diseases of safflower like Fusarium wilt can
be transmitted through seeds. Therefore, it is always advisable to
treat the seeds with appropriate fungicide like Thiram, Captan @ 3
g/kg seed or with Carbendizim @ 1g/kg seed.
Planting time for safflower September 2nd fortnight to October 1st
fortnight. Under extended rainfall situations, the crop can be sown
till end of October to first week of November.
Well drained deep black soils are most suitable. The crop can come
up well even in light textured soils provided irrigation facility is
available. Alkaline reaction favors wilt disease.
Cultivation of cotton after safflower or vice-versa should be avoided
as it results in poor yields and inefficient exploitation of nutrients
because of their identical rooting habits.
Under Rainfed conditions, the entire recommended fertilizers are
to be applied as basal. In the traditional single cropped yasangi
tracts of the state, application of recommended fertilizers 2-3 weeks
prior to optimum planting time is recommended for maximum
efficiency under receding soil moisture.
371
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The flowering and grain filling stages are more sensitive to water
stress conditions. One irrigation 30 days after planting helps in
better growth of the crop. In soils that crack, apply irrigation well
before cracks develop for better control of water.
First 20 to 35 days are critical for crop –weed competition.
Alachlor 50% or Pedimethalin 30% 2.5 l /ha.as Pre-Emergence is
recommended. Harrowing at 25 DAS and 45 to 50 DAS not only
controls weeds, but also conserves the soil moisture.
Spray of Dimethoate @ 2ml or Monocrotophos @1.6ml or
Chlorpyriphos @ 2.5 ml at 40 and 60 DAS is recommended to
control aphids.
Horticultural Crops
Sweet orange
Incidence of Dry root rot is noticed in sweet orange. If noticed
initially, irrigate the field and next day drench the soil near tree
base with Carbendazim @ 2 g. or Mancozeb @ 3 g. per litre of water
or 1% Bordeaux Mixture. Use more of Organic fertilizers such
as green manures and apply the mixture of 1 Kg of Trichoderma
culture with 90 kg farmyard manure and 10 kg Neem powder
incubated for 15 days near tree base @ 10 kg mixture per plant.
Spray Urea @ 1 kg per 100 litres of water.
Micronutrient deficiency was observed at some places. To correct
it spray Formula-4 @ 5 g per litre of water on young flush and fruit
at peas size stage.
To manage mangu mite, spray water soluble Sulphur @ 3 g or
Propargite @ 1 ml per litre of water, two times with an interval of
15 days.
To control Leaf Folder in Sweet Orange, Spray Neem oil @ 5 ml
(1000 ppm) per litre of water and if incidence becomes severe
spray Profenophos 50 E.C @ 2 ml or Imidacloprid 17.8 S. L @ 0.5
ml or Novluron 10 E.C @ 0.7 ml or Thiomethaxom 25 W.G @ 0.3
g. + Dichlorvos 76 E.C @ 0.5 ml per litre of water. Spray chemical
372
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
pesticides 14 days after Neem Oil Spray for efficient control of
insect.
Intercultivation should not be done when the tree is in Flowering
and Fruiting stage.
Irrigation should be done regularly as the Temperatures rises.
2,4-D @ 15 ppm. (1 g per 100 liters) should be sprayed at the time
of Flowering, one month after Fruiting and one month before
harvesting the fruits.
To control Stem end rot in Sweet Orange, Spray Carbendazim @ 1
g. per litre of Water.
Apply Bordeaux paste on broken branches and stems of sweet
orange and Acid lime after hail storms to avoid Fungal infections.
Acid lime
If dry root rot is noticed initially, irrigate the field and next day
drench the soil near tree base with Carbendazim @ 2 g. or Mancozeb
@ 3 g. per litre of water or 1% Bordeaux Mixture. Use more of
Organic fertilizers such as green manures and apply the mixture
of 1 Kg of Trichoderma culture with 90 kg farmyard manure and
10 kg Neem powder incubated for 15 days near tree base @ 10 kg
mixture per plant. Spray Urea @ 1 kg per 100 litres of water.
To control Canker disease use Balaji, resistant variety. Cut the
infected branches, Spray 2 to 3 times streptocyclin @ 1 g and
Copper oxy chloride @ 30 g per 10 liter of water with an interval
of 20 days. Apply Bordeaux mixture on infected stem base and
branches after scraping of infected bark.
Apply Bordeaux paste on broken branches and stems after
hailstorms to avoid Fungal infections.
Mango
Spray KNO3 @ 10 g per litre of water and Boron @ 1.25 g per litre
of water separately for uniform flowering and fruiting.
To manage sucking pests in mango, first burn the dropped fruits
373
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
and spray 2 times Chlorpyriphos @ 2ml or Dichlorvos @ 1.5 ml or
Carbaryl @ 3 g + Neem oil (1500 ppm) @ 2.5ml per liter of water
with an interval of 15 days.
Low temperatures, cloudy weather and higher atmospheric
humidity favours the incidence of mango hoppers. To control
them spray Dimethoate @ 2 ml or Chlorpyriphos @ 2.5 ml per litre
of water at flower initiation and fruit formation stages.
Low night temperatures and hot day temperatures favours the
incidence of Powdery mildew in mango. To control, spray water
soluble Sulphur @ 3 g or Kerathane @ 1 ml or Myclobutanil @ 1 g
or Hexaconazole @ 2 ml per litre of water.
Spray Naphthalene Acetic Acid @ 20 ppm twice during January to
February to reduce flower drop.
Spray KNO3 (13-0-45) @ 10 g per liter of water to retain marble
sized fruits.
To control flower and fruit drop due to prevailing weather
conditions spray 2 times 1 % Urea (10g/liter), once at marble size
fruits and another at 20 days after first spray or spray 1 % KNO3
(10g/liter).
To increase the fruit size in Mango Spray 10 g. 13-0-45 + 1.25 g.
Boron per Litre of water.
To control Mango fruit fly, apply Parathion around the tree basin
@ 50-100 g. per tree to control pupae in the soil. To attract adult
flies, arrange white or Yellow Methyl eugenol traps @ 4 per acre.
Application of Poison bait that is mixture of 50 ml Malathion and
200 g. Molasses or Jaggery in 2 litres of water across the field to
attract the adult fruit flies.
Livestock and dairy
Deworming of all the adult stock with broad spectrum
antihelmintic, Albendazole (Dose: 10 mg/ kg Body weight) during
Last week of September.
374
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
FMD vaccine during month of September.
Segregation of animals viz., animals in milk production, Dry,
pregnant, non- pregnant and heifers.
Feeding regimen is followed as per the production and body weight
of the animals.
Dry fodder: 7 Kg, Green fodder: 10 -15 kg, concentrate mixture:
2Kg, Mineral mixture: 100 gm (can meet the requirements of an
animal producing 5 litres of milk) is the ration to be given.
For every additional 2.5 kg milk production for cows provide 1 kg
concentrate mixture and buffaloes give 1 kg for every 2 kg milk
production.
Special care should be taken in case of pregnant and animals in
advanced pregnancy and early lactating animals.
Breeding animals should be observed morning and evening for
heat symptoms.
Teaser bull can be employed in the herd for detecting the animals
in heat.
Feeding of colostrum to the newborn within twelve hours of
calving (1/10th of body weight).
Provide tender leafy fodder to the calves for early development of
Rumen.
Calf starter may be given from 3rd day onwards to 2-3 weeks before
weaning.
Deworming on 14th day, 35th day 56th day and monthly repeated
up to six months of age. Later, deworming should be done every
six months’ interval (Piperzine adipate: 10mg/kg body weight,
Albendazole: 7.5 to 10 mg/kg body weight).
After attaining the age of six months, FMD vaccine is to be given
during September.
375
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sheep and Goat
Rotational deworming at quarterly interval is advised.
PPR vaccine during the month of September yearly once both in
sheep and goats.
Extensive and semi-intensive system of rearing is practiced in
Telangana state.
Green fodder may be given as per the availability.
Flushing must be followed to improve lambing rate in the flock
(Flushing is feeding 150 to 200 gm of concentrate mixture to
breedable population two weeks before breeding season.
For every 20 breedable ewes on breeding Ram should be provided
in the flock.
Naval dressing with povidine/ Betadine immediately after birth.
Lambs must be accessible to the mother for feeding colostrum
within twelve hours of lambing.
Antibiotic treatment during change of weather.
Poultry
In commercial poultry farms, farmers should follow the breed
specific regimens advised by the breeder from time to time for
both broilers and layers.
For backyard poultry Varieties like Rajasree, Vanaraja, Giriraja
Gramapriya, Sreenidhi etc. are available in Telangana.
Those opting for one day old chicks should have facility for rearing
ie., poultry shed, waterers, feeders, and well-balanced ration for
better growth.
Standard vaccination schedule as advised by the agency may be
followed.
376
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fisheries
Provide optimal quantity of feed based on biomass calculation to
avoid excessive feeding, since cost of feed is the major expenditure
in fish culture.
Feed should be stored in cool and dry places. Don’t store the feed
for long time and also check for any mould formation before using
it.
Fish feeding rate in water bodies should be at 2-3 % of body
weight. Use of aerators or pumping water from bottom to top using
motor pumps or disturbing the pond water through boat motor is
essential.
Application of Hydrogen peroxide at 600 grams per acre to improve
DO level
Apply Zeolite at 50 kg/ha to prevent the occurrences of Toxic gases
(Ammonia and Carbon monoxide) mixed with 20 to 25 Kg sand
and broad cast uniformly throughout the pond.
Application of water sanitizers [potassium permanganate (400
grams/acre), salt (30 to 60 kg per acre), benzalkonium chloride (1
liter per acre)].
Reduce high stocking density
Spray Iodine solution (10%) at 1 litre/acre/4 feet depth or
Formalin (32%) at 1 litre per acre
Use of disinfected and sundried feeding bags.
Cleaning of pond dykes from grass
Application of Trichlorofon (0.25-0.5 ppm) at 150 ml per acre once
a week for 4 weeks through water.
Mixing of Ivermectine at 10 grams per ton of fish biomass for 7
days through feed.
377
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
TAmIL NAdU ANd PUdUCHeRRy
Rice
Varieties recommended for Rabi season
Season and month Varieties
Late Samba, Thaladi, VGD 1, TKM 13, CO 52, CO (R) 50, ADT 39, ADT 38,
Pishanam, Late ADT 49, CO 43, CO 43 sub.1, Improved White Ponni,
Pishanam ADT (R) 46, TRY 3, CO(RH) 4, TPS 3, CR1009
Navarai ADT 53, CO 51, ADT (R) 45, TPS 5, MDU 6, ADT 36,
ADT 37, CORH 3, ASD 16, TKM 9
Nursery management
Recommended nursery area: 20 cents /ha, seed rate: 30 kg for
long, 40 kg for medium and 60 kg for short duration varieties,
20 kg for hybrids, 5-7 kg for single seedling and 12 -15 kg for
two seedlings planting under SRI, 75 kg for dry seeded rice.
Seed treatment: Soak the seeds in Carbendazim or Pyroquilon
or Tricyclozole solution @ 2 g/kg seeds/l water for 10 hours
and drain excess water.
Treat seeds with talc-based Bacillus subtilis @10g/kg of seed
and soak in 1 litre of water overnight.
Bio-fertilizers: Soak the seeds in a solution containing 1 kg
each of Azospirillum and Phosphobacteria or 1kg of Azophos
bioinoculants overnight.
Weed management in nursery: Apply Pyrazosulfuron ethyl @
20 g/ha on 3rd-4th DAS (OR) apply pre-emergence herbicide
Butachlor 1.0 l/ha (or) Pendimethalin 1.0 l/ha on 8 DAS
Fertilizers: Apply 40 kg DAP as basal or after 10 DAS; 4 kg of
gypsum/cent for clayey soils; 100 g ZnSO4/cent.
For dry nursery raised seedlings, dip in 2% ZnSO4 or ZnO for
30 min before transplanting.
378