ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
UTTARAKHANd
Wheat
Under Irrigated conditions of Plain, Bhawar and Trai area the
timely sown varieties of wheat are UP 2903, UP 2938 UP 2855, UP
2784, Up2628, UP2554, HD 3086, HD 2967, WH 1105, DPW 621-
50, PBW 502, WH542 and BL 953 while late sown variety includes
UP2944, UP 2844, UP, 2865, UP 2526, UP 2565, WH 1124, HD
3059, PBW 590, DBW 173, DBW 71, Raj 3765, Raj 3077 and UP
2944.
In Rainfed areas of Plain, Bhawar and Trai area timely sowing (Oct.
second fortnight) varieties are PBW 396, PBW 644, WH 1080,
PBW 299, PBW 175 and V 306.
Timely sowing varieties (Nov. first fortnight) like UP 2572, UP
2584, VL 953, VL 907, VL 804, VL 738, HS 507, HS 240 and HPW
349 used under irrigated area of lower hills.
Timely sowing varieties (Oct. first fortnight) like UP 2572, VL 953
and VL 829 used under rainfed area of lower hilly area.
In Rainfed conditions of hill area timely sowing varieties (Oct. first
fortnight) i.e., HPW 42 and HS 365 used.
The recommended seed rate is 100 kg/ha.
Fertilizer and manure: 150 kg/ha Nitrogen, 60 kg/ha Phosphorus
and 40 kg/ha Potash for timely sown wheat and 80 kg/ha Nitrogen,
40 kg/ha Phosphorus and 30 kg/ha Potash for late sown conditions.
For higher yield 10 tonnes well decomposed farmyard manure
should be applied in one ha area.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp. /kg of seed.
4-6 irrigations are required.
In case of the incidence of yellow (stripe) rust, spray of
Propeconazole (25 EC) @ 1 ml /litre water should be applied.
74
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Gram
Sowing time of gram is November first fortnight optimum time
late sowing up to Dec. first fortnight under plain, Bhawar and Trai
area while mid Oct. to Nov. first week in lower hilly area.
Small grain size varieties of gram are Pant G 114, DCP 92-3, GNG
1581 and RSG 963.
Medium size grain varieties of gram are Pant g 186, Pusa 547, Pant
G3, Pant G4, Pant G5.
Bold Size size variety of gram is Pusa 256.
Kabuli channa varieties of gram are Pusa 1003, Pusa 1053, Pant
Kabuli Channa 1, Pant Kabuli Channa 2 and JGK 1.
60-80 kg/ha seed required for small size while 80-100 kg/ha seed
required for medium size.
Fertilizer: 15-20 kg/ha Nitrogen, 40-45 kg/ha Phosphorus and 20-
30 kg/ha Potash required.
Barley
The recommended varieties of Barley are VL Barley 85 and VL
Barley 118
For an area of one ha 100 kg seed is sufficient.
10 Tonnes well decomposed farmyard manure should be applied
in one ha area.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp/kg of seed.
Sowing should be done by last week of October in irrigated
condition and first fortnight of October in rainfed conditions.
In case of the incidence of yellow (stripe) rust spray of Propeconazole
(25EC) @ 1 ml /litre water should be applied.
Seed treatment with carboxin fungicide @ 2.5 gm/kg seed for
management of loose smut disease.
75
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Lentil
Under Plain, Bhawar and Trai areas Nov. first fortnight, late sowing
up to second week of December is the best time to sow Pant Lentil
5, Pant Lentil 7, Pant Lentil 8, Pant Lentil 9 varieties.
The recommended varieties of Lentil are VL Massor 5, VL Masoor
225, VL Masoor 126, Masoor 507, VL Masoor 103 during Mid Oct
to Nov. first week of Nov for Lower hilly area.
For an area of one ha 40 kg seed is sufficient.
Fertilizer and manure: 40-50 kg/ha Phosphorus and 20-30 kg/ha
Potash.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp./kg of seed.
Management of wilt disease should be done by selecting resistant
or tolerant varieties, seed treatment and following crop rotation
with field crops.
Yellow Mustard/Toria
The recommended verities of Toria are VL Toria 3, Pant Hill Toria
1, Uttara, and Pant Pili Sarson 1.
Yellow Mustard varieties Pani Swela and Pant Girja are sown
during Oct. first Fortnight in Plain, Bhawar and Trai area whereas
Pilli sarso 1, Pant Sweta Pant during Oct. second fortnight in lower
hilly.
Early sowing varieties of Rye are Pusa Mustard 27 and Pant Rye 19
in Plain, Bhawar and Trai area whereas timely sowing last week of
Sept. to first fortnight of Oct are Pant Rye 20, Pant Rye 21 and RGN.
Late sowing varieties are NRCHB 101, Ashirwad and Vardan.
For an area of one ha 5 kg seed is sufficient.
Fertilizer and manure: 120 kg/ha Nitrogen, 40 kg/ha Phosphorus
and 40 kg/ha Potash for rye and 90 kg/ha Nitrogen, 40 kg/ha
Phosphorus and 20 kg/ha Potash and 30 kg/ha sulphur for yellow
mustard.
76
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp/kg of seed.
Acetamiprid (20% SP) @ 0.3 gm/litre should be sprayed for aphid
management in the evening when there is no honeybee movement.
Pea
Dwarf varieties of pea like KPMR 522, ARPANA, Malviya Matar
15, DDR 23, Pant Matar13, Pant Matar 25, Pant Matar 74, Pant
Matar 155, Pant Matar 250 are sown during mid Oct. to Mid Nov.
in Plain, Bhawar and Trai area while regular varieties are Pant
Matar 42 and Pant Matyar 243.
Varieties: Pant Matar 13, Pant Matar 14, IPFD1-10 are sown during
Mid Oct. to first week of Nov. in lower hills while regular varieties
are VL Mater 40 and VL Mater 42.
For an area of one ha, 80-100 kg seed regular varieties and 125 kg
seed for dwarf is sufficient.
Fertilizer: 20 kg/ha Nitrogen, 60 kg/ha Phosphorus and 40 kg/ha
Potash.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp/kg of seed.
Sulphex fungicide @ 2gm/litre or Dinocap @ 0.5 ml/litre should be
sprayed for management of powdery mildew disease.
Incidence of Pod borer insect can be managed by foliar spray of
bioinsecticide Bacillus thurengensis @1.5 gm/lire or Deltamethrin
@1 ml/litre at the time of flowering.
Onion
The recommended varieties of Onion are VL Pyaz 3, Agrifound
Light Red (ALR), Pusa red, Nasik reed, Pusaratnar, Arkaniketan,
Arkabindu, Arkapragati, Agri found light red, Agri found rose,
Pnjab selection, Pusa white flet.
For an area of one ha 8-10 kg seed is sufficient.
77
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fertilizers and manure: 100 kg/ha Nitrogen, 60 kg/ha Phosphorus,
80 kg/ha Potash and 20-30 Tonnes well decomposed farmyard
manure should be applied in one ha area.
Seed treatment should be done with 2 gm thiram/kg seed or 5-10
gm biofungicide Trichoderma spp/kg of seed
The right time of nursery sowing is October month and transplanting
should be done in the month of December to overcome bolting
problem.
Stemphyllum disease can be managed by spraying of mencozeb @
2.5 gm/litre after 10 -15 days interval with sticker.
Purple disease can be managed by spraying of defeconazole @1ml/
litre with sticker after 10-15 days interval after disease incidence.
Thrips insect can be managed by spraying Imidacloprid insecticide
(17.8 SL) @ 3ml/10 litre.
Potato
Hybrid varieties of potato are Kufri Jyoti, Kufri Giriraj, Kufri
Jawahar, kufri Bahar, Kufri satraj, Kufri chipsona, Kufri Lalima and
Kufri chandan.
The recommended time of sowing is October second fortnight for
Plain, Bhawar and Trai area while in irrigated valley (up to 3000 ft)
Mid Sept. to Mid Oct. Irrigated valley (up to 5000 ft) Jan-Feb.
For an area of one ha 25-30 quintal seed is sufficient.
Fertilizers and manure: 180 kg/ha Nitrogen, 80 kg/ha Phosphorus,
80 kg/ha Potash and 20-25 Tonnes well decomposed farmyard
manure should be applied in one ha area.
Green leafy vegetables for Nutrition Garden
The recommended varieties of radish are Japanese long and
Doonagiri gol 8-10 kg/ha seed is sufficient. Sowing time is Sept to
Jan for Plain, Bhawar and Trai area, Sept. to Oct. for Lower hilly
area while June to July for hill area.
78
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The recommended seed rate for coriander is 20-25 kg/ha for
varieties of Pant haritima and Pant dhaniya 1.
The recommended variety of Spinach is All green and seed rate is
25-30 kg/ha.
Apple
In lower hilly and hill area the time of sowing is December to first
fortnight of February.
General varieties for cultivation are Red delicious, Royal delicious,
Golden delicious, Rinch-A-Red, Red gold, Early sanwari, Fany,
Chuabatia princess, Rimer.
Early colouring varieties for cultivation are Wash delicious, Bright,
and early, skyline, supreme delicious, top red delicious, hardy man.
Spur varieties for cultivation are red spur, silver spur, rd chief,
arigansper, hardy man spur, golden spar, super chief, scarlet spur 2.
Prepare tree basins and apply recommended dose of FYM (100 kg/
plant), Nitrogen (1.5 kg Urea per tree basin), Phosphorous (SSP
2 kg per plant) and potash (MOP 1.7 kg per plant) for plants of
age more than 10 years. Complete dose of Potash and phosphorous
should be given at the Time of basin preparation along with FYM
during December- January.
During winters (November- December), expose the root system
of infected trees and cut the infected portion and apply Bordeaux
paint / chaubatia paste for the control of White root rot.
Apply a mixture of lime + copper sulphate + linseed oil (30kg lime+
500 gm copper sulphate + 500 ml linseed oil in 100 L water) on
stems upto a height of 2-3 ft from the ground level during October-
November for protection against sun burning.
Spray Horticulture Mineral Oil (2%) (20ml/L water) for the control
of sanjose scale at green tip stage of apple bud.
Drench with Chlorpyriphos 20 EC (4ml/L water) in collar region
during October-November using at least 5 L of pesticide emulsion
79
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
per tree in collar region for the control of woolly apple aphid. Spray
with Chlorpyriphos 20 EC (2ml/L water) or quinalphos 25 EC
(2ml/L water) in September- October to check aerial population of
woolly apple aphid.
For the management of scab/ powdery mildew give a spray of
dodine (1gm/L water) or fluxapyroxad + difenconazole (30ml/100
L water) at green tip stage.
Peach
Recommended varieties for Plain, Bhawar and Trai area Partap,
Early grand, Floridasum, Floridaprince, Floridared, Floridagold,
Sarbati, Sarbatisurka, Pant peach 3.
Recommended varieties for lower hilly areas are Red june,
Paradelux, Totapari, Safeda, early white jaint, Alekzendar, Red
gold, Sun heaven, Snow queen.
Plum
Varieties for Plain, Bhawar and Trai areas are SatlajpurpIe,
Kalaamratsari, Aloochapurple, Tetro, Kabuli greengang.
Recommended varieties for lower hilly areas are Centarosa, Beauty,
Redbute, Frontier, Maripoza.
Varieties for hill areas are Sweet early, Methle, Celse, Elephantthard,
Maripoza.
Apricot
Recommended varieties for lower hilly areas are Newkesar, Harko
t, Earlysikle, Kesa, Naeeth, Safeda, Charm agi, Sakarpara.
Varieties for hill areas are Kesa, Nageth, Safeda, Charrnagi,
Sakarpura.
Almond
Recommended varieties for lower hilly areas are Drek, Ne-plus-
altra, pearless
80
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Varieties for hill areas Marsid, Nanperil, IXL, Ne-plus-altra, Texas
Fish and Pond Maintenance during Winter Season
Fish, being a cold-blooded aquatic animal, needs special care
during winters. As temperature of the surface water is colder than
the bottom layers, the fish prefers to live in the bottom zone. Famers
shall keep the water depth up to 6 feet, so that it gets enough space
for hibernating in the warmer bottom zone. In shallow waters, the
whole water column becomes cold, which affects the fish and can
prove fatal.
As day length and light intensity also decreases during winters,
oxygen levels decline in ponds due to reduced photosynthetic
activity. The situation further aggravates during continuous cloudy
days. The farmers are advised to aerate their ponds either by adding
fresh water or by using aerators, especially during early hours of
the day.
Feed intake of fish decreases with decrease in temperature as its
digestive system becomes sluggish. Hence, it is essential to reduce
the feeding rate by 50-70 % depending on the temperature.
In case the temperature falls below 50 degrees, it is advice to stop
feeding. Excess feed remains unconsumed and accumulates at the
pond bottom, which deteriorates the water quality.
Farmers re further advised to use low protein diets. It is also
necessary to reduce/stop adding organic manures such as cow
dung, poultry droppings, and pig dung in the pond as rate of
decomposition of organic manures declines due to poor microbial
activity during winters. It is also advised to go for periodic raking of
bottom soil (with the help of barbed wire) to prevent any suspected
accumulation of toxic gases at the pond bottom.
Animal care during winter season
Feed more roughages (like hay, straws. etc.) or forages (berseem) to
maintain the milk production and body heat of the dairy animals.
81
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Additional quantum of grains like maize, wheat, oats, or readily
available whole grains can be given to animals for meeting their
energy requirements which generally increases during winters.
Use of oil cakes such as mustard oil cake, cotton seed cake etc. can
be fed. Seed cakes suffice the protein requirements of the animals
and boost production.
Calves should be fed with more milk, Increase the feedings per day
from two to three times while holding the amount per feeding the
same.
Hypothermia is a major risk for neonatal calves, and housing,
feeding and hydration are key considerations for minimizing
hypothermia.
During harsh winters, keep animals indoor but take care of
ventilation. Keep a vent open for air to pass through the animal
house.
In case of loose housing system, use curtains around the animal
house. The curtains can be made from tarpaulin, bamboo, dry
grass, paddy straw, jute bags, guinea bags, jute, etc.
Chop the branches of the shady trees which will enhance the
infiltration of sunlight in the animals shed.
Temperature of drinking water. The water should not be frozen
in any case. If the water is too cold, add some hot water to it for
balancing the temperature and making it lukewarm.
Young stock should be provided with protective clothing to prevent
heat loss from the body and providing warmth which can be made
from gunny bags, sacks, blankets etc.
If the floor of the animal house is concreted, it should be covered
with bedding usually comprising of straws which will providing
insulating effect and prevent heat loss. Provide a bedding of about
4 to 6 inches to prevent heat loss due to conduction.
Keep the floor and bedding of the animal dry using sand,
woodchips, saw dust, straws, rice husk etc.
82
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
For the bed drainage of urine and other excretions, maintain
proper alleys and drains. Wet floor may lead to diarrhea, fever,
pneumonia, coccidiosis, hypothermia leading to death, etc. Young
animals are at higher risk of developing disease due to wet floors.
Avoiding overcrowding of the animals in shed as it leads to
accumulation of ammonia which may hasten and enhance severity
of respiratory problems especially pneumonia. Use recommended
floor space for housing animals.
For proper elimination of ammonia, livestock waste and other
disease-causing pathogens, it is advisable to clean shed twice a day.
It will also enhance ventilation in shed.
Winters bring chapped and cracked skin to animals as well
and udder being the most sensitive part. Care should be taken
to dry the udder of dairy animal thoroughly and if the udder
becomes chapped or raw, there are many commercial balms and
moisturizers that are highly effective in healing and moisturizing
udders. Lavender oil, calendula, peppermint oil, etc. can be used
for making udder balm at home.
Do not clip hair during harsh winter. Clipping of hairs is advisable
before and after winters.
Deworm the animals at regular intervals. It is advisable to repeat
deworming after 21 days of the first dose to prevent worms and
their larvae from development.
Timely vaccination.
Timely sowing of winter fodder crop as Berseem (Vardan, Maskavi,
VL 10, VL 42 VL 43) and Oat (UP094, UPO 11, Pant Oat 3) in
October to mid-November.
83
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-II
RAJAsTHAN
General
Collection of soil samples just after harvesting of Kharif crops
for analysis purpose: After harvesting of kharif crops, collect soil
samples for different plots from the field for soil analysis purpose.
This will help in scientific nutrient management planning for
different crops to be sown in forthcoming Rabi season, Nutrient
Use Efficiency (NUE) could be increased, and this will help in
proper soil health. Using recommended dose of fertilizers as per
soil testing report in balanced ratio, the production as well as
economic profit could be increased.
Soil Moisture Conservation: Generally, in Rajasthan state
monsoon remains active up to the end of September month,
rainfall in fallow fields or in kharif cropped fields at harvesting
time can be conserved through ploughing followed by planking for
early sowing purpose of different Rabi season crops like Rapeseed-
mustard, Taramira, gram. By doing this farmer can save one
irrigation water (to be used in pre-sowing irrigation) which could
be utilized in these crops on later critical stages.
Application of Gypsum and organic manures: As per soil testing
report application of gypsum in the fields during land preparation
to maintain the soil pH at optimum level should be done. This will
help to enhance availability of different plant nutrients especially
Ca & S, as gypsum is the cheapest source of these two secondary
nutrients for plants. This increased availability of all plant nutrients
will help in higher production and quality improvement in Rabi
crops especially in oilseeds & Pulses. To increase organic carbon
level in the soil, application of decomposed FYM or any other
organic manure in the soil as per availability and mix in the
soil during land preparation should be done. This will improve
84