ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-III
UTTAR PRAdesH
Soil Management
Soil testing for all fields is mandatory and also ensure that every
field has its own soil health card.
Application of sufficient quantity of inorganic fertilizers based on
soil health card is advised to maintain soil health.
Grain Storage
Store the grains and pulses in clean and pest free bags at dried and
cool places; Treat the bags with 5% neem oil solution. The bags shall
be stacked above the ground level. Farmers may put Neem leaves
in the bags to prevent the grains from insect attack and moisture.
Use of camphor 5-10gms/quintal
Use of Parad Tikdi @ 8-10 tablets/quintal
Vegetable Nursery & Production
Healthy nursery of Brinjal, Chilli and Tomato should be raised.
Low tunnel poly house should be used for nursery raising to avoid
white fly infection,
Seed treatment practice should be adopted before sowing of
vegetable seeds.
Fruit Production
In Guava orchards apply 50 g carbofuron + 200 g neem cake
with Trichoderma harzianum to control wilt Hands should be
properly cleaned with with soap and water before, after and during
harvesting operation
129
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Vegetable care
Proper washing of vegetables and fruits during pandemic is more
important than ever before as it helps to remove various harmful
microorganisms.
Washing fresh produce is also important as it tends to have more
soil attached to it than prepackaged fruits and vegetables.
Farm women were also further advised to wash vegetables and
fruits in lukewarm water by adding salt/ alum/ vinegar/ baking
soda (1teaspoon in a bucket of 10 lt..) whichever is easily available
at home and soaking them for at least 1-2 hours to make them free
from any contamination.
Wash vegetables before pealing and cutting, washing after pealing
and cutting may lead nutrients loss.
Fodder & livestock management
Fodder management- There are two major fodder crops Barseem
and Oat.
Berseem
Due to higher production potential, succulence, palatability,
nutritive value, and continuous supply of fodder over a long period
of seven months. It is popularly known as king of fodders. Apart
from supplying protein, calcium, phosphorus, and other minerals
it enriches the fertility of the soil and improves its productivity. In
repeated cuttings from November to May end it yields about 400
quintal highly nutritious and palatable fodder.
Mescawi, Wardan, JB-1, BL-10, BL-22, and BL-42 are important
varieties. BL- 22 and BL-42 supply green fodder upto Mid-June.
It grows well on loam to clay loam soils, rich in lime and having
good drainage facilities. For growing of berseem land should be
properly levelled and has good drainage. To prepare a good seed
bed give three to four ploughings, each followed by planking.
130
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
October to November is the best time of sowing.
Berseem does not grow well on soils where it is sown for the first
time, because it requires association with special species of bacteria
(Rhizobium trifoli) which is essential for its proper growth. Prepare
one litre of 10 per cent Gur solution with one packet of berseem
culture for 8-10 kg seed treatment. Rub the culture on seed, dry
the seed in shade and broadcast in standing water on the same
day, preferably in the evening because the direct sunrays kill the
bacteria.
20 to 25 kg seed require for one hectare. For getting early first cut
and higher yield of good- quality fodder, mix 400 g seed of Chinese
cabbage variety of mustard with the full seed rate of berseem. In
case of November sowing mix berseem with oats, using half the
recommended seed rate of oats.
Apply eight tones of farmyard manure alongwith 20 kg phosphorus
(125 kg single super phosphate) per acre at the time of sowing.
In case absence of farmyard manure, apply 10 kg nitrogen (22 kg
urea) and 32 kg phosphorus (200 kg single super phosphate) per
acre. The application of phosphorus in the form of single super
phosphate supplies Sulphur also. In case of berseem + ryegrass mix
apply 10 kg N (22 kg urea) per acre after each cut.
Poa annua (bueen) is a serious weed of berseem and it effect
during the early period of growth. Spraying Basalin (fluchloralin)
45 EC @400 ml in 200 litres of water per acre before the sowing
of berseem. Where the infestation of weed (Trianthema
portulacastrum) is serious, delay the sowing to the second week of
October, the incidence of weeds is drastically reduced due to the
fall in temperature.
The first irrigation is important and should be applied early to get
a good crop. It should be given within 3-5 days in light soils and
6-8 days after sowing in heavy soils. Later on, irrigate at 8-10 days
interval during summer and 10-15 days during winter depending
upon soil type and weather.
131
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
First cutting is ready after about 45 days of sowing and subsequent
cuttings may be taken at 30-35 days intervals during winter and
at 25-30 days intervals in spring and summer. It gives 5-6 cutting.
Harvesting of berseem should be done with scythe that saves
labour by about 50 per cent.
Oats
Oats is an important fodder crop next to berseem. It yields about
200-220 quintal fodder per acre.
It grows well in cool and moist weather conditions. High
temperature at blossoming increases the proportion of empty
spikelets and reduces the seed yield.
It grows in all types of soils, except the alkaline or waterlogged. It
can tolerate slight acidic and saline conditions.
Improved varieties are Kent, OL-9, OS-6, OS-8, Haryana Jai, UPO-
212, JAO 822.
Prepare seed bed by giving three ploughings to make it free from
weeds and pulverized.
Optimum time of sowing is from second week to last week of
October. 30-40 kg seed require according to varieties for acre by
the kera method or with pora or drill in rows 25-30 cm. It can be
10-15% higher yield through sowing bi-directional method. Seed
treated with @ 01 gm Vitavax per kg of seed to ensure freedom
from smut.
Apply 10-ton farmyard manure or compost per acre 15 days before
the sowing with 25 kg urea at sowing time and 25 kg urea 25-30
days after sowing. In the absence of FYM, it requires 110 kg urea
and 8 kg P2 O5 (50 kg single Superphosphate or 50 kg DAP) per
acre.
Three to four irrigations including the pre-sowing irrigation are
sufficient. First irrigation should be
given 25-30 days after sowing and subsequent irrigations at an
interval of 30-35 days. In case multicut management irrigation
132
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
should be given after each cutting.
Control of weed, application of pre-emer. linuron or post emergence
of 0.2 kg 2,4-D per acre.
The harvesting of oats from boot to milk stage. First cutting should
be done 55-65 days after sowing leaving a suitable height of 3-4
inch and subsequent cuttings at 45-50 days interval.
For seed production, crop sown before 15 November and left after
first cutting at 55-65 days after sowing. Apply an additional dose of
12 kg N (33 kg urea) per acre after sprouting. This crop gives about
6 quintals of seed besides 100 quintals per acre of green fodder.
Livestock management
During rabi season the weather gets cold, so we should make
proper arrangements to protect our animals from the cold stress
so that they do not suffer from any problem (respiratory problems)
and also continue to produce.
Dairy Animals
Feed more roughages (like hay, straws, etc.) or forages (berseem) to
maintain the milk production and body heat of the dairy animals.
25-30 kg of leguminous fodder like berseem with 10 kg straw need
for large animal producing 10 liters of milk.
Additional 3 kg concentrates in the form of grains like maize,
wheat, oats etc. and oil cakes can meet the requirements of large
animal for maintaining body temperature. If the grains are costly
or not available, then the use of oil cakes such as mustard oil cake,
cotton seed cake, etc. can be feed in recommended dose.
Hypothermia is a major risk for neonatal calves, and housing,
feeding, and hydration are key considerations for minimizing
hypothermia.
To avoid Pneumonia and Hypothermia like condition, keep
animals indoor but take care of the ventilation. In case of loose
house, use curtains (tarpaulin, bamboo, dry grass, paddy straw,
133
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
jute bags, guinea bags, jute, etc.) around the animal house.
Sunlight will not only warm the animal house but also disinfect it
at the same time.
The water should not be frozen in any case. Too cold or too hot
water is detrimental for ruminal microflora. Supplied water should
be heated to 10⁰ C to ensure proper water intake.
Adult animals as well as young stock should be provided with
protective clothing (gunny bags, sacks, blankets, etc.) to prevent
heat loss from the body.
Keep the floor of the animal shed dry using sand, woodchips, saw
dust, straws, rice husk, etc.
For better drainage of urine and other excretions. Wet floor may
lead to diarrhea, fever, pneumonia, coccidiosis, hypothermia
leading to death, etc. Young animals are at higher risk of developing
disease due to wet floors.
In Indian conditions, farmers usually lit fire in the animal house
for heating the animal house but removal of gases from shed.
Deworm the animals at regular intervals. If the animals have not yet
been vaccinated against FMD, PPR, Haemorrhagic Septicaemia,
Enterotoxemia, Black Quarter etc, ensure that this is done now.
Most of the animals affected Hypothermia in this season. So proper
rubbing and the animal should be warmed by giving energy by
external as well as internal. Give the shock therapy such as warm
fluids, calcium related fluid, liver tonic as supportive therapy for
3-5 days.
Sheep and Goat
Provide at least 1m2 floor space for each sheep and goat. The floor
should be non-slippery and covered with hay, husk, straws, etc. for
insulation.
In severe weather, animals can crowd together for warmth, but this
increases the likelihood of injury and respiratory diseases.
134
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Goats are the hardy animals possessing thick coat of hairs and
require least to be look after. The addition of maize or oats in the
ration can help increasing the energy content of feed. Generally,
provide 200-250 gram of grains to sheep and goats for desired
weight gain.
Always provide a source of roughage in the form of grass or other
types of hay. Berseem is a great course of protein and energy.
Care should be taken to over feeding of fodder and straw to avoid
fear of urinary calculi formation. Always provide a good salt and
mineral source to avoid this condition.
The breeding males should be given an extra concentrate feed
(grains) during the mating period so that they may perform well.
Do not shear wool or hairs during winters. Shearing or clipping of
hairs is advisable before and after winters.
The animals dwelling in muddy or wet conditions are susceptible
to cracked and bruised feet and can suffer from foot rot and warts.
Use of zinc sulphate and copper sulphate for foot dips.
Sheep and goats should be dewormed multiple times a year to
guard against stomach and round worms. Deworming should be
done in November or December.
Lice and mites are increasingly prevalent during the winter months.
High infestations can cause anemia, poor coat and skin quality. Use
of permethrins and pyrethrins is advisable as de-lousing agents.
Ivermectin with recommendation from veterinarian can be used.
New-borns must be dried quickly after birth as hypothermia can
set in quickly. Lambs and kids are most susceptible to neonatal
pneumonia so, providing dry and warm place.
Poultry
In winters when temperature goes down below 15o C, various
problems like reduction in weight gain and egg production, water
intake, fertility and hatchability, enhanced mortality, etc. occurs.
135
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
House should be designed in a way that maximum sun light enters
the shed during daytime and protected from chilled winds, for this
gunny bags should be hanged at cold air entry.
Birds release a lot of moisture in their breath and droppings which
adversely affects their health, if there is restricted ventilation it
causes ammonia build up in the air which causes respiratory
problems. So, they need plenty of fresh air circulating around the
house.
Prior to chick being placed in house, floor should be covered
with saw dust, shredded newspapers, grain husk, etc. and install
Bukharis or heaters or bulbs for maintaining temperature.
Poultry uses food for two main purposes i.e., as an energy source to
maintain body temperature and to carry on normal physiological
activities and as building material for development of bones, flesh,
feather, egg, etc. Therefore, adequate, balanced, and healthy feed
should be provided.
As low temperature causes more feed intake and higher oxygen
demand, provide adlib feed to the birds for rapid weight gain and
egg production.
If water is cold enough, then it should be given to chicken
after adding hot water to it, so that the water comes to normal
temperature.
Many of vaccines/ medicine/ anti stress vitamins are given to
poultry through water. Ensure pest and rodent control in the
poultry shed.
Store feed in dry place so that it may not get in contact with
moisture.
Fish
Fish, being a cold-blooded aquatic animal, needs special care
during winters.
As temperature of the surface water is colder than the bottom
layers, the fish prefers to live in the bottom zone. Farmers shall
136
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
keep the water depth up to 6 feet, so that it gets enough space for
hibernating in the warmer bottom zone.
As day length and light intensity also decreases during winters,
oxygen levels decline in ponds due to reduced photosynthetic
activity especially in cloudy weather. Ponds either by adding fresh
water or by using aerators, especially during early hours of the day.
Feed intake of fish decreases with decrease in temperature as its
digestive system becomes sluggish. Hence, it is essential to reduce
the feeding rate by 50-75% as temperature.
When water gets colder, the cold-blooded fishes’ metabolism will
start to slow down.
In case the temperature falls, it is advised to stop feeding. Excess
feed remains unconsumed and accumulates at the pond bottom,
which deteriorates the water quality.
It is also advised to go for periodic raking of bottom soil (with the
help of barbed wire) to prevent any suspected accumulation of
toxic gases at the pond bottom,” said the experts.
During winters, various fungal, bacterial, and parasitic diseases
like fin rot, gill rot, EUS and argulosis may appear in the pond.
Treat the pond with CIFAX @ 400 ml/acre just before the onset of
winters. Also treated with potassium permanganate @1-2 kg/acre
or limestone @ 50-100 kg/acre. Salt application @ 100 kg/acre also
helps in protecting fish against disease in winters.
Rabi Crop production
Wheat
Wheat requires well drained and clayey loam soil. However, good
crop of wheat can be raised in sandy loam and black soil also. It’s
sown when the average daily temperature falls to around 22-23 0C,
which happen in last October to November.
For medium sized grain varieties seed rate of 100 kg/ha, for bold
seeded variety 125 kg/ha and for late sown seed rate of 125-150 kg/
137
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
ha is recommended.
Improved varieties are DBW-187 (Karan Vandana), DBW-222,
252, 47, HS 542 (Pusa Kiran), K 8804, Deva, Indra, Ujiyar, Gomti,
Halna, Atal, Gangotri, Prasad, Naina, Unnat Halna, Mandakani,
kalayan sona
Laser land levelling is a precursor resource conservation technology
that is a must for the proper land leveling and implementation which
increase productivity and profitability. Zero tillage technology is
direct sowing in untilled land which can save time and fuel energy
at lower cost.
Preparation of soil before sowing, one deep plough followed by
2-3 light ploughing and planking with 10-ton FYM and 120 kg
nitrogen, 60 kg phosphorus and 40 kg potash fertilizer sufficient
for one ha. Seed sown in 4-5 cm inside the soil and spacing of 22.5
cm is considered optimum for irrigated timely sown wheat, for late
sowing spacing is reduced to 15-18 cm.
Seed treatment with carboxin (75 WP) @2.5 g/kg seed) or
carbendazim (50 WP) @ 2.5 g/kg seed or tebuconazole (2DS) @
1.25g/kg seed or a combination of a reduced dosage of carboxin
(75 WP) @ 1.25g/kg seed and a bioaget fungus, Trichoderma viride
@ 4 g/kg seed is recommended.
Yellow rust, powdery mildew, brown rust, Karnal bunt and spot
blotch may also be controlled with the foliar sprays of propiconazole
@ 0.1% and termite prone areas, seed treatment with chlorpyriphos
@ 0.9g a.i. /kg seed, be taken up for their management.
Aphid control by Imidacloprid17.8 SL @ 100ml/ha as foliar spray
when the population reaches more than 10 aphids per tiller or 5
aphids per ear head.
Wheat sown under irrigated conditions requires 4 to 6 irrigations
depending on the soil and weather conditions. If water is available
for 2 irrigations, it should be applied at crown root initiation stage
and boot leaf stage.
138
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Control of weed by isoproturon with 2,4-D or metsulfuron, or
sulfosulfuron with metsulfuron can be applied at 30-35 DAS at
sufficient soil moisture.
Under irrigated conditions the yield may vary from 2.5 to 6.5
tonnes /ha.
Barley
The crop requires temperature around 12-150C during growing
period and around 30 0C at maturity time. Sandy to moderately
heavy loam soils having neutral to saline reaction and medium
fertility are the most suitable type for barley cultivation.
Two to three ploughing with cultivator followed by planking after
every ploughing to save the crop from Termite, Ants and other
insect, seed treatment is advisable.
10 tonne FYM with 60 kg nitrogen and 30 kg phosphorus require
for on ha. Half nitrogen and full dose of Phosphorous should be
applied as basal and remaining half of the Nitrogen should be top
dressed after first irrigation, while in case of light soils, one third
of nitrogen and full dose of phosphorous as basal, one third of
Nitrogen after first irrigation and rest after second irrigation.
Optimum seed rate of 50 kg/ha for upland, 25 kg/ha for lowland
and hilly region
Sowing should be done in rows either by seed drill or behind the
plough in furrows. Optimum depth of sowing is 4.0 to 5.0cm.
Narendra Barley 1445. DWRB 92, Prakhar (K1055): (resistant to
all three rusts, smut, and leaf blight diseases), K1149 (Geetanjali),
K551 (Ritambhara) and K125 (Azad) recommended for alkaline/
saline soils. Seed treatment with Vitavax or Bavistin @ 2 gm per
Kg seed.
Generally, Barley crop require 2 to 3 irrigations for better yield.
Depending upon the water availability, suitable stages for irrigation
should be identified.
139
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Among the insect-pests, aphid (Rhopalosiphum maidis) can be
controlled by spraying Imidacloprid 200 SL, at 100 ml/ha in 200 -
250 litres of water per ha.
Barley crop gets ready for harvest by the end of March to first
fortnight of April.
The average yield of rain fed crop ranges between 2,000 and 2,500
kg/ha, whereas that of irrigated crop is twice as much. Under
favorable conditions grain yield of 5 - 6 tonnes/ha.
Maize
Maize may be sown any time from April to October, as the climate
is warm even in the winter.
Maize requires a well-drained sandy loam soil with organic matter.
It thrives well in soil pH between 5.5 to 8.0.
Buland variety maturity 178 days, tolerant to cold and average yield
31 q/acre, Partap-1 maturity 180 days, tolerant to cold, resistant to
diseases and average yield 25 q/acre suitable for baby corn. PMH
9 variety maturity 180 days, cold tolerant, resistant to lodging,
common rust and average yield of 32.5 q/ acre
Seed is sowed in the middle of October to the middle of November.
4-5 deep ploughing provided an ideal condition for sowing of crop
with compost 5 tons / ha and N2 100-120 Kg, P2O5 60 Kg and K2O
30-40 Kg. Urea should be applied in splits, mainly at sowing, knee-
high and tasseling stages. Entire dose of P & K 2O with 40 Kg urea
and 25 Kg of ZnSO4 at sowing recommended.
Seed treatment with Bavistan@ 3gm/Kg of seeds, depth of sowing
4-6 cm with spacing 70cm x 25cm for row to row and plant to
plant. 20-22 kg seed required for one hectare of land.
Thinning should be done after 10 days of germination keeping one
plant per hill. At knee high stage (about 35 days after germination)
the crop plants should be earthed up followed by light hand
weeding. The second earthing up should be done at 60 days after
germination of crop.
140
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
First irrigation is to be applied 3-4 weak after seedling emergence,
subsequently at 4- 5 weeks till March and thereafter at 1-2 weeks’
interval.
Maize stem borer control by application of Endosulfan 35EC @250
ml and Monocrotophos 36 WSC @275 ml/ha in 125 litres of water
by starting spray 2-3 weeks after sowing. Application of Neem
based pesticides like Margosa @2 ml/ltrs of water are found to be
benefecial.
Army worm and Silk cutter control by spray Sevin (Carbaryl) 50
WP@ 250g in 125 ltrs of water and control of leaf blight by spraying
of Indofil M45 @ 500g in 250 ltr of water/ha. at 10 days interval.
Pre-emergence application of Atrazine @ 1 Kg a.i/ha is
recommended for weed control.
Maize is ready for harvesting even when the stacks and leaves are
somewhat green, but the husk cover has dried and turned brown.
Shell Maize when the moisture content ranges between 15-20%.
Conventional harvestor combines can be used for threshing Maize
with husk to save labour involved in dehusking. The Maize ears
should preferably be dried for 3-4 days after harvesting to improve
grain recoveries and reduce breakage losses during shelling.
Bengal Gram (Chickpea)
Gram is a winter season crop but severe cold and frost are injurious
to it. Temperature, day length and availability of moisture are the
three major abiotic factors affecting flowering. Chickpea is sensitive
to high (>35°C) as well as low (<15 degree C) temperatures at the
reproductive stage. Both extremes of temperatures lead to flower
drop and reduced pod set.
Chickpeas with colored and thick seed coat are called desi type.
The common seed colors include various shades and combinations
of brown, yellow, green and black.
The kabuli type chickpeas are characterized by white or beige-
colored seed with ram’s head shape, thin seed coat, smooth seed
141
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
surface, white flowers, and lack of anthocyanin pigmentation on
the stem.
Chickpea grows best on well-drained, light to medium textured
soils. Saline, alkaline, or waterlogged soils are not suitable for its
cultivation.
The sowing is done in the month of October or November. Late
sowing (December-January) should be avoided as the late-sown
crop may experience moisture stress and high temperatures at
the critical stage of pod-filling, leading to reduced yield and seed
quality.
Chickpea should be sown by the pora method in rows 30 cm. The
seed should be placed 10-12.5 cm deep, because the shallow-sown
crop is more liable to be damaged by wilt.
The optimum seed rate for desi and kabuli gram are 15-18 kg
and 37 kg per acre, respectively. It differs from variety to variety,
depending on seed size.
The seeds should be treated with fungicides (2 g thiram + 1 g
carbendazim kg-1 seed) before sowing for reducing seed and soil
borne fungal diseases. If chickpea is being grown for the first time,
the seeds should be inoculated with Rhizobium culture.
The doses of fertilizers should be determined based on the results
of soil test. The generally recommended doses for chickpea include
20–30 kg nitrogen (N) and 40–60 kg phosphorus (P) ha-
If soils are low in potassium (K), an application of 17 to 25 kg K
ha-1 is recommended. Foliar spray of 2% urea at flowering has
been found beneficial in rainfed crops.
Basal application of Zinc Sulfate (ZnSO ) at 10-25 kg ha-1 is found
4
to give positive response. Foliar application of 0.5% Zinc Sulfate
mixed with 0.25% lime also effective in zinc deficiency, 0.5% (w/v)
ferrous sulphate in iron deficiency and soil application of 1.0-2.5
kg Borax ha-1 or foliar application of 0.25 kg Borax ha-1 helps in
correcting Boron deficiency. Seed treatment with
142
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
3.5 g sodium molybdate is found to have beneficial effect in
chickpea
Chickpea is generally grown as a rainfed crop, but two irrigations,
one each at branching and pod filling stages, are recommended for
higher yield.
Chickpea is a poor competitor with weeds at all stages of growth.
Pre-emergence herbicides, such as Fluchloralin @ 1 kg a.i. per ha.
effective control. Mechanical and/or manual weeding can be done
where wide row spacing is used.
Fusarium wilt is a vascular disease that causes browning and
blackening of xylem. Its control by use resistant varieties (JG 11,
JAKI 9218, JG 130, KAK 2, JGK 1, JGK 2), deep ploughing and
seed treatment with Trichoderma viride @ 4 g kg-1 seed.
Collar rot control by crop rotations with cereals, use resistant
varieties (eg, PBG 1, BG 267, GNG 146), seed treatment and 2-3
sprays of mancozeb or chlorothalonil @ 2-3 g L-1 water. Growing
high yielding wilt resistant varieties, KWR 108, DCP 92-3, Pusa
256, Vardan.
JG 315, Alok, Karnal Chana-1 and Surya under normal condition
and Udai, Pusa 372, and Pusa 256 under late sown. Kabuli chickpea
variety Pusa 1003 in eastern region and JGK 1 and KAK 2 for
Bundelkhand region
Application of either NPV @ 250 LE (larval equivalents) per ha
when the egg/larval population reaches economic threshold level,
or 5% neem fruit powder extract (about 15 kg neem fruit powder
per ha.) provide effective control of pod borer. Application of
chemical sprays (endosulfan @ 350 g a.i. ml ha-1 indoxacarb @ 70
ml a.i. ha-1 or spinosad @ 45 ml a.i. ha-1) can be applied as and
when needed.
The crop should be harvested when leaves start to senesce and start
shedding, pods turn yellow, plants dry, seed hard and rattles within
the pod. After harvest, the plants can be dried in the sun for a few
143
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
days. Threshing can be done using commercially available power
threshers.
Field Pea
Being a winter season crop it requires a cool growing season with
moderate temperature throughout the life. High temperature is
more injurious to pea crop than frost. High humidity with cloudy
weather results into spread of fungal diseases like damping-off
and powdery mildew. Optimum monthly temperature suitable for
growth is 13-18°C.
A well-drained loamy soil free from excessive soluble salts with
neutral pH range of 6.5 to 7.5 is suitable for successful cultivation
of the crop. Prepare a level field for even distribution of irrigation
water, one deep ploughing followed by 2-3 harrowing and planking
after each operation. To ensure good drainage and aeration in the
field, powdery seedbeds must be avoided.
15th October to 15th November is the best time of sowing. Require
70-80 kg. seed per ha and spacing 30-45 X10 cm for tall variety,
semilarly, 100 kg. Seed per ha & spacing 22.5X10 cm dwarf varieties
with 4-5 cm depth.
Improved Varieties: Swati (KFPD-24), Malviya Matar-15 (HUDP-
15), Vikas, Sapna (KPMR-1441), IPF 4-9, HUDP 15 IPF 99-25
Malviya P-15 DPL 62 KPMR 522 KPMR 400
It can be sown as intercrop with autumn sugarcane as two rows of
pea at 30 cm row spacing in the centre of two sugarcane rows at 90
cm apart.
Field-pea is mostly grown as rainfed/un-irrigated on residual soil
moisture and can sustain drought conditions up to some extent.
One or two irrigations at 45 DAS and if needed, at pod filling stage,
may be the best recommended irrigation schedule.
Apply 20-30kg/ha nitrogen in tall types and 40kg/ha nitrogen in
dwarf types as a starter dose of basal dressing. The phosphorus and
potassic fertilizer should be apply as basal dose based on soil test
144
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
value. 20 kg Sulphur and 15 kg zinc sulphate per hectare should be
applied.
For control weed spraying Pendimethalin (STOMP) 30 EC @
0.75-1 kg a.i./ha as pre-emergence and for post emergence apply
Metribuzin 70 % WP @ 0.25 kg a.i./ha at 15-20 day after sowing in
400-600 liter of water.
Seed Treatment with Thirum (2gm.) +Carbendazim (1gm.) /kg of
seed.
Powdery Mildew symptoms first appears on the leaves then
on other green parts of the plant. Resistant var. like Pant Pea-5,
Malviya-15, JP-885, HUP-2 etc. with timely sowing and spraying
with Karathane @ 1 ml/litre or wettable sulphur @ 3 gm/litre of
water and repeat after 10-15 days, if necessary.
Rust is caused by fungus and control by spraying Mancozeb 75 WP
@ 2 g / liter of water.
Leaf Miner: Larvae of the insect makes tunnel in the leaf
causing severe damage in the month of Dec.to March. Spraying
Oxydemeton methyl (Metasystox) 25 EC one litre in 1000 liter of
water per hectare for its control.
Fully ripe and threshed after sufficient drying in the sun. The clean
seed may be sun dried for 3-4 days to reduce their moisture content
up to 9-10% to be safely stored in appropriate bins.
20-25qtls of grain and straw per ha (irrigated) and 10-15 qtls grains
per ha (rain fed) condition.
Lentil (Masoor)
Lentil requires cold climate. It is very hardy and can tolerate frost
and severe winter to a great extent. It requires cold temperature
during its vegetative growth and warm temperature at the time of
maturity. The optimum temperature for growth is 18o-30 oC.
Well drained, loam soils with neutral reaction are best for lentil
cultivation. Acidic soils are not fit for growing lentil. Sowing time
for Rainfed lentil sown in second fortnight of October, under
145
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
irrigated conditions first fortnight of November and late sowing in
first week of December.
Important recommended varieties are- PL 639, Malika (K-75),
NDL-2, DPL-62, IPL-81, IPL-316, L 4076, HUL-57, DPL-15 etc.
For one hactare area require of 40 - 45 kg small seed, 45 - 60 kg
bold seed, 50 - 60 kg for late sown and 60 - 80 kg/ha seed for utera
cropping with spacing rows 30 cm. apart and it should be sown at
a lower depth (3 - 4 cm).
Seed treatment with fungicide thirum (2gm) +carbendazim
(1gm) or thirum @ 3 gm or carbendazim @2.5 g per Kg. of seed,
Insecticide chlorpyriphos 20 E.C. @8 ml./Kg. of seed and culture:
Rhizobium + PSB, one packet each for 10 kg seed.
First irrigation at 40 - 45 days of planting and second at pod filling
stage. Most critical stage for moisture stress is pod formation
followed by flower initiation.
Nitrogen 20 kg Phosphorus 40 kg and Sulphur 20 kg is
recommended per hectare in medium to low fertile soils as basal
dressing. Application of 20 kg Zinc Sulphate per ha in zink deficit
soil, rainfed and late sown condition. Foliar spray of 2% urea
improves yield.
Two manual weedings, first at 25-30 days and second 45-50 days
after sowing. Weedicide like Pendimethalin 30 EC @ 0.75 - 1 kg a.i.
per hectare may be used as a pre-emergence treatment.
Yield - A well mange crop yields about 15 - 20 quintals of grain per
hectare.
Rapeseed and Mustard
Rapeseed and mustard crops are grown on light loam, loam and
clay loam soils. Excessive alkaline or acidic soils are not suitable
for cultivation of these crops. The land preparation should be done
properly with two ploughings followed by planking to get a well
pulverized, leveled land with good drainage facility.
146
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Varieties: Varuna, Rohini, Vaibhav, Vardan, Basanti, Urvashi,
Kanti, Maya and Ashirvad
Optimum sowing time for rapeseed and mustard is last week of
September to mid of October.
Seed rate of 5-6 kg/ha is sown in rows of 30-40 cm and plant to
plant distance of 10-15 cm apart.
Thinning should be done 25-30 days after sowing to maintain
proper plant population.
A fertilizer dose of 50:60:30 kg NPK/ha for rainfed crop is optimum.
Application of 20kg Sulphur and 1 kg Boron improves the seed
quality and oil yield.
Two important diseases of rapeseed and mustard are white rust and
Alternaria Blight. For controlling these diseases, spray of Blitox-50
(0.3%) or Diethane M 45 @ 2 g/l of water at 10 days interval is
found to be effective. Mustard aphid is a key pest of rapeseed and
mustard causing 35-40% reduction in yield and 5-6 % reduction in
oil content. Spraying of Dimecron 0.25 ml/lit of water 2-3 times.
Early sown crop escapes the aphid incidence.
Rapeseed and mustards are sown on residual soil moisture hence
no irrigation is required in rapeseed and mustard. Irrigation
increases the yield of rapeseed and mustard significantly.
Mulching with rice straw @ 4 ton/ha results in increase of mustard
seed yield significantly.
It should be harvested when the pods turn yellowish. The crop is
liable to shattering, hence should be harvested just before the pods
open to avoid losses.
With the use of improved varieties and other agronomic practices
a yield of 10-12 q/ha of rapeseed and 15-20 q/ha of mustard can be
obtained easily.
147
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Flaxseed (Alsi)
Flaxseed is a cold season crop and is grown in both northern and
southern regions of India. It can be grown in loamy deep soil,
which is fertile, silty, and well drained. Flaxseed can be sown as per
utera system of cropping, i.e., sowing flaxseeds before harvesting
of standing paddy crop so that it will utilize moisture efficiently
under rainfed agro-ecosystem. It requires relative humidity of 50-
60% with 7-8 inches of rain.
Flax roots go deeper into the soil, so prepare land by proper deep
ploughing. 2-3 ploughings can be done. Required 30-40 kg seed/ha.
Seeds must be placed 4-5 cm below the soil with spacing between
each row can be kept as 20-30 cm and between each crop can be
kept as 10cm.
Improved Verities are K-2, T-397, No.55, NP (RR) 9, LC 185,
S-4, B-67, M-10, Jawahar-17, Jawahar-7 (R-7), Mayurbhanj, Hira,
Mukta, Neelum, etc.
Use FMY (farmyard manure) at the time of land preparation. If the
soil does not have sufficient nutrients, then 30kg of N2 and 15 kg
of P2O5 per ha can be given at the time of sowing.
Termite, cutworm, wireworm, semilooper, leaf minor, bud fly,
pasmo, aster yellows, gram pod borer are some of pests and
diseases which can harm flax crop. To protect the crop, avoid
continuous cultivation of flaxseed in the same field, use light
trap and attractant for bud fly, proper solarisation, neem-based
formulation, Seed treated to protect seed-borne diseases and
application of pre-emergent and post-emergent herbicide for the
protection from weeds.
Crop maturing by the end of February which is depends on
season and time of sowing. When leaves are dry, and balls turned
brownish, flax crop is ready to harvest. The average yield of crop
varies from 210-450 kg/ha of seed and irrigated crop yield can
range from 1,200-1,500 kg/ha.
148
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Rabi Vegetables
Potato
The crop is raised when maximum day temperature is below 30oC,
and night temperature is not above 20oC. The highest tuberization
is obtained when day and night temperature is 20oC and 14oC,
respectively.
Potato can be grown on different types of soils with well drained,
loose, friable, non-saline and non- alkaline loamy sand to sandy
loam soils are suitable for this crop. Soil pH should be in the range
of 5.5 - 8.0.
Early Varieties are Kufri Surya (Heat tolerant, white tuber, resistance
to late blight, good keeping quality, early planting and average yield
100-125 q/acre in 90-100 days), Kufri Pukhraj (Tall plant, vigorous
and erect, susceptible to late blight but escapes due to earliness,
large uniform tubers, oval, white and yields 130 q/acre in 70-90
days), Kufri Ashoka (Tall plant, erect and medium compact with
green foliage, large tubers, smooth, oval long with white skin
and yields about 110 q/acre in 75-80 days), Kufri Chandramukhi
(white, large, smooth, white skin, uniform and more attractive and
yield about 100 q/ acre in 80-90 days) and Kufri Pushkar (White
tuber, resistance to late blight, good keeping quality and average
yield is 160-170 q/acre in 90-100 days).
Late varieties Kufri Chipsona-3 (Medium maturing 90-100 days,
resistant to late blight, good keeping quality, oval and white tubers,
low reducing content (100 mg per 100 g fresh weight) and high
tuber dry matter (21.5%) which is required for producing light
coloured chips, suitble for processing into chip and average yield
is 165-175 q/acre) and Kufri Frysona (Medium maturing 90-100
days, resistant to late blight, good keeping quality, oval and white
tubers, suitable for French fries due to long tubers with high dry
matter (22%) and average yield is 160-170 q/acre).
149
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sow 20 kg of Dhaincha for green manuring from end of June to
first week of July.
The seed requirements for an acre on the basis of seed size are
viz, large size- 10-12 q/acre medium size- 7-10 q/acre Small size-
4-6 q/acre. Dipping cut tubers in a solution of 1% Thiourea and 1
ppm Gibberellic Acid (one ml per 100 litres of water) for an hour
followed by air drying the treated tuber pieces for 24 hours in thin
layers in shade.
To control black scurf, treat the tubers with Monceren @ 2.5 ml per
litre of water for 10 minutes after taking out of the cold storage. The
best time for sowing is last week of September to mid- October for
the autumn crop and the second fortnight of January for the spring
crop. A ridger should be used for planting the crop manually. Semi-
automatic or automatic planters are recommended where tractor
power is available. For mechanized planting, the spacing between
the rows and tuber should be kept 65x18.5 cm or 75 cm x 15 cm
respectively.
Twenty tonnes of farmyard manure or green manuring alongwith
75 kg of N (165 kg of Urea), 25 kg of P2O5 (155kg of Single
Superphosphate) and 25 kg of K2O (40 kg of Muriate of Potash)
per acre should be used.
Application of Biozyme 8 Kg granule per acre each at the time of
planting and earthing up and spray of Biozyme liquid formulation
at tuber initiation stage @200ml/acre increases the yield of potato.
A double mould board plough or a ridger should be used for
earthing up after 25- 30 days of sowing.
Application of paddy straw mulch @ 24 q/acre immediately after
planting provides affective control of annual weeds and irrigation
saving.
Furrow Irrigation: The first irrigation should be given immediately
after planting as it ensures better germination. The potato crop
responds well to light and repeated irrigations. The total number
of irrigations will be 7-8 in light textures soils.
150
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Drip irrigation in potato results not only increase in yield but also
saves 38% of water over conventional method of irrigation. Under
this system, irrigation should be applied at two days’ interval. The
potato crop should be irrigated with a lateral pipe having dripper
discharge of 2.2 litre per hour.
Fertigation saves 20% fertilizer. Apply 24.50 kg Urea, 6.6 kg Mono
Ammonium Phosphate and kg Muriate of Potash (white) per acre
during first month of the growing period of the crop in 7 equal
doses with every second irrigation (4 days’ interval).
The first fertigation should be started after germination of the
crop. The remaining amount of fertilizer 97.5 kg Urea, 26.2 kg
Mono Ammonium Phosphate and 26.7 kg Muriate of Potash
(white) should be applied in equal doses during rest of the crop
season (before last irrigation) in 13 equal doses with every second
irrigation (4 days interval).
Harvesting: Suitable tractor operated digger has been developed
and is available in the market. There should be optimum moisture
in the soil at the time of harvest. The clods affect the efficient
functioning of potato digger.
Grading: After harvesting the potato should be graded. Four grades
may be made 1-Small size (below 25 g weight) 2-Medium size (25-
50 g weight) 3- Large size (50-75 g weight) and 4- Extra-large size
(above 75 g weight). Leno bags can be used for potato storage by
keeping quality intact.
It should be stored in the cold storage where temperature at
2-4 degree C and relative humidity is 75- 80%.
Onion
The optimum temperature for vegetative phase and bulb
development is 13-24˚C and 16-25˚C, respectively. It requires
about 70% relative humidity for good growth. It can grow well in
places where the average annual rainfall is 650-750 mm with good
distribution during the monsoon period.
151
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
The best soil for successful onion cultivation is deep, friable loam
and alluvial soils with good drainage, moisture holding capacity
and sufficient organic matter. The optimum pH range, regardless of
soil type, is 6.0 - 7.5, but onion can also be grown in mild alkaline
soils.
Varieties of onion are Agrifound dark red, Agrifound white, N-53,
Pusa red, Pusa white round, Pusa white flat, Arka kalyan, Arka
lalima
For raising nursery, apply 5 qt. decomposed farmyard manure at
the time of last ploughing in
0.05 ha and mix well with soil. Raised bed should be 10-15 cm
height, 1.0-1.2 m width and length as per convenience may be
prepared. Application of pre-emergence herbicide pendimethalin
@ 0.2% is recommended to control weeds in nursery. About 5-7 kg
seeds treated with thiram @ 2 g/kg are required to raise seedlings
for one hectare.
Application of 20-30 tone FYM/ ha one month before transplanting
and mixed in the soil. The recommended dose of nutrients is 100
kg N, 50 kg P and 80 kg K/ ha. The whole quantity of phosphorus,
potash and half quantity of nitrogen should be mixed in soil before
transplanting. The remaining half nitrogen should be given in top
dressing equal quantity in two split doses at 30 days and 45 days
after transplanting. Close planting at 15 cm between rows and 7.5
cm between plants is most conducive for high yields.
Application of 15 kg sulphur/ha on soils sulphur level above 25 kg/
ha while 30 kg sulphur/ha is needed for soils having sulphur level
below 25 kg/ha for optimum production of onion.
If not controlled thrips properly can cause yield loss up to 50%.
If infestation observed in field, spray of Fipronil (Regenta)@30
ml/15lt water or Prophenophos@ 10ml /10 lt. water by 8-10 days
interval. Maggots’ infestation observed in January-February
Month. Its control by spraying Chlorpyriphos @2 lt /acre along
with irrigation water or sand.
152
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Severe infestation of purple blotch and stemphylium blight may
cause yield loss up to 70%. Spray of Propineb 70%WP@350 gm/
acre/150 lt of water, twice at 10 days interval is sufficient.
The germination of the onion can be checked by storing at 300 C
for 9 days after 72 73 harvesting with this technology we can store
onion at room temperature for three months.
Tomato
Tomato is a warm season crop. The best fruit colour and quality is
obtained at a temperature range of 21-24°C. Tomato can be grown
on a wide range of soils from sandy to heavy clay. However, well-
drained, sandy or red loam soils rich in organic matter with a pH
range of 6.0-7.0 are considered as ideal.
Azad T-3, Azad T-5, Azad T-6, Kashi Amrit, Kashi Anupam, Kashi
Sharad, Kashi Visesh, Pusa Hybrid 8, Pusa Hybrid 4, Pusa Uphar,
Pusa Hybrid 2
About 100-200g of seeds are sufficient for raising seedlings for one
hectare of land. The seedlings with 5-6 true leaves are ready for
transplanting within 4 weeks of sowing.
For hybrid varieties, recommended dose of fertilizer per hectare
is 180 kg N, 100 kg P2O5 and 100kg K2O. Half dose of N, P &
K are given at the time of transplanting. Remaining quantities of
top dressed 30 days after transplanting. A third dose of 60 kg N is
applied 50 days after transplanting.
To control spread of whiteflies, uproot, and destroy affected plants. In
case of severe infestation, take spray of Triazophos@250ml/200litre
or Profenophos@200ml/200litre of water. Repeat the spray after 15
days.
Thrips is a very Common pest and mostly seen in dry weather.
They suck sap from the foliage and results in curling of
leaves for management apply Imidacloprid 17.8SL @60ml or
Fipronil@200ml/200Ltr of water.
153
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Fruit Rot is major disease of tomato observed due to changing
weather. To control spray of Mancozeb@400gm or Copper
Oxychloride@300gm. Repeat spray in 15 days interval.
Early Blight: Initially small, brown isolated spots are observed
on leaf. Later spots are seen on stem and on fruits. If infestation
of early blight is observed, spray Mancozeb@400gm or
Tabuconazol@200ml/200Ltr. Repeat spray 10-15 days after first
spray.
Cauliflower
It can grow well in wide range of soil from sandy loam to clay. pH
of soil should be 6 to 7. Add lime in case of low pH soil.
Early varieties: Early Kunwari, Pant Gobhi, Pusa Deepali
Mid Early Varieties: Pusa Hybrid- 2, Pusa Sharad, Pant Gobhi- 4
Mid Late: Pusa Shubhra, Pusa Himjyoti, Punjab Giant 35
Late Varieties: Pusa snowball-1, Pusa snowball K-1
August to mid-September and October to first week of November
is best transplanting time. Use spacing of 45x45 cm and seed rate is
250 gm per acre is required.
Apply FYM @250-300q/ha, Nitrogen @100-150kg/ha, Phosphorus
@ 60-80kg/ha and Potassium @ 80kg/ha. Half quantity of N and
entire quantity of P and K are applied to the soil at the time of
field preparation. The remaining half quantity of N is top dressed
four weeks after transplanting. Borax @ 15 kg/ha and ammonium
molybdate @ 15 kg/ha should also be applied in deficient soil of
boron and molybdenum, respectively.
Browning (Brown Rot or Red Rot) caused by boron deficiency which
is influenced by soil pH. This may be controlled by application of
borax or sodium borate @ of 20 kg/ha in soil application.
Deficiency of molybdenum causes ‘whiptail’ syndrome, especially,
in highly acidic soils. Application of lime and ammonium
molybdate at the rate of 1-2 kg/ha as soil application.
154
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Buttoning: Development of small curds with inadequate foliage
in cauliflower is known as buttoning. Transplanting of more than
6-week-old seedlings. Planting early varieties in late and vice versa
leads buttoning.
Diamond back moth is serious pest of cauliflower. They lay eggs
under surface of leaves. In case of lack of proper control measures,
it causes loss up to 80-90%. In severe infestation spray Spinosad
2.5%SC@80ml/150Ltr of water.
Leaf spot and Blight: If infestation of blight is observed to control
do spray of Mancozeb or Copper oxychloride @ 300gm/150 Ltr
along with 20 ml sticker.
Cabbage
A pH range of 6.0-6.5 is considered as optimum for growing
cabbage. Plants growing in saline soils are prone to diseases. A
temperature range of 15- 21 degree C is considered as optimum for
growth and head formation of the crop.
Varieties: Golden acre, Pusa Drumhead, Pride of India, Pusa
Mukta, Pusa Synthetic, Early Drumhead, Late Large Drum Head,
K-1 are some of the varieties.
Early cabbage is sown during July-November. About 300-500g of
seeds are sufficient for raising nursery to plant one hectare. Prior to
sowing seeds are treated with Trichoderma viride (4 g/ kg of seed)
or Thiram (3g/ kg of seed).
Fertilizer Management: For good yield, 15-20 tonnes of well-
decomposed FYM should be incorporated into the soil about 4
weeks before transplanting. Generally, application of 80-120 kg N,
60-100kg P2O5 and 60-120 kg K2O is recommended for optimum
yield. Half the dose of N and entire amount of P and K is given at
the time of transplanting. The balance N is given six weeks after
transplanting or at the time of earthing up.
Harvesting and Yield: Cabbage is ready for harvest at 90-120 days
after planting. Cabbage should be harvested promptly when the
155
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
heads are firm and mature. Average yield obtained from early
varieties is 25-30 t/ha and that of late type is 40-60 t/ha.
Cutworm: As a preventive measure apply Methyl Parathion or
Malathion (5% dust) @10kg/acre in soil before sowing.
Leaf Eating Caterpillar, if infestation is observed in field to control
of leaf eating caterpillars spray Dichlorvos@200ml/150Ltr water or
Flubendiamide 48%S.C@0.5ml/3Ltr of water.
Incidence of sucking pest like Aphid and Jassid is observed
spray Imidacloprid 17.8SL @ 60ml/acre using 150 Ltr water.
Leaf spot or blight control take spray of Metalaxyl 8% + Mancozeb
64%WP@ 250gm/150Ltr of water along with sticker.
Vegetable Pea
It gives best results when grown under well drained soil with
pH range of 6 to 7.5. Crop cannot withstand in water logging
conditions. For acidic soil, do liming.
Varieties: Azad P1, Azad P 3, Azad P 4, Azad P 5, Arkel
Sowing time between end of October to Middle November and for
early on 15 September.
Apply 8 tons of farmyard manure, 20 kg of N (45 kg Urea) and 25
kg P2O5 (155 kg Superphosphate) per acre before sowing.
Pendimethalin@1 lt/acre and Basalin@1 lt/ acre give good results
in controlling the weeds.
Wilt: The roots turn black and the later rot away. Control by treat
seeds with Thiram@3gm/ lt water and avoid early sowing in badly
affected areas and crop rotation.
Powdery Mildew: Patchy, White powdery growth appears on lower
side of leaves, branches, and pods. Three times spray Karathane
40EC@80 ml in 100 water per acre at 10 days interval.
156
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Carrot
Loamy or sandy loam soils with enough humus is well suited to the
cultivation of carrots. The ideal pH range for obtaining a good yield
is 5.5-6.5. The optimum temperature for growth between 16 to 20
°C, while temperatures above 28°C drastically reduce top growth.
Seed rate: 5 to 6 kg /ha.
Varieties: pusa kesar, Pusa meghali, Pusa vrishti
Fertilizer Management: 20-30 tonnes of FYM/ ha should be applied
at the time of field preparation. 50 kg N, 50 kg P and 100 kg k/ ha
is recommended.
Nematodes: To control nematodes, apply neem cake@0.5ton/acre
at time of sowing. Growing carrot once in 3 years by following and
growing marigold once in 2 years crop rotation
Leaf spot: If infestation is observed in field to control spray
Mancozeb@2gm/Litre of water.
Brinjal
A daily mean temperature of 13-21oC is most favourable for its
successful production. The growth of the crop is severely affected
when temperature falls below 17oC. It can be grown in plains
throughout the year but rabi (October-November) season is the
best. Well drained and fertile soil is preferred for the crop. Ideal pH
for cultivation of crop is 5.5 - 6.6
Varieties: Pusa Shymala, Pusa Purple Long, Pusa Purple Cluster,
Pusa Kranti, Pusa Bhairav, Pusa Anmol (H), Pusa Hybrid 5
(long), Pusa Hybrid 6 & 9 (round), Arka Sheel, Arka Shirish, Arka
Kusumkar, Arka Navneet (Hybrid), Arka Nidhi, Arka Keshav,
Arka Neelkanth.
370-500g seed required for one ha and seed treatment with
Trichoderma viridae/T. harzianum @ 2g /100 g of seeds or
Carboxyn 37.5% + Thiram 37.5%. Raised beds of size 7.2 x 1.2 m
and 10- 15 cm in height are prepared. Thus, 10 beds required for
157
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
one-hectare area. To avoid mortality of seedlings due to damping
off, drenching of the beds with Bavistin (15-20 g/10 litres of water).
Seeds are sown at a depth of 2- 3 cm and covered with a fine layer
of soil followed by light watering by water can. The seedlings are
ready for transplanting within 4-6 weeks of planting when they
attain a height of 15 cm with 2-3 true leaves.
Long fruited varieties are transplanted at 60 x 45 cm, the round
varieties at 75 x 60 cm and high yielding varieties at 90 x 90 cm
spacing. 15-20 ton of FYM is incorporated into the soil. Application
of 150 kg N, 100 kg P2O5 and 50 kg K2O is recommended for
optimum yield.
A light irrigation is given on the first and third day after
transplanting. Thereafter irrigation is given at an interval of 8-10
days during winter and 5-6 days during summer.
Pre- emergence application of Fluchloralin (1.5 kg a.i./ha) coupled
with one hand weeding 30 days after transplanting is effective for
control of weeds.
Delta and yellow sticky traps @ 2-3/ acre should be installed for
hoppers, aphids, and white fly etc. Give 2 to 3 sprays of 5 % NSKE
against sucking pests. Neem oil (2%) application is also helpful
in reducing borer infestation, though marginally, then apply
imidacloprid 17.8 SL @ 150 ml/ha. Pheromone traps @ 5/ acre
should be installed for monitoring and mass trapping of shoot &
fruit borer Leucinodes orbonalis. Replace the lures with fresh lures
after every 15-20-day interval. Crop rotation with non-solanaceous
crops should be followed. Use of green manure, mulching with
polythene, soil application with bleaching powder will reduce the
infection of bacterial wilt disease.
The fruits become ready for first picking in about 120-130 days
of seed sowing. Fruits are harvested at an interval of 8-10 days.
Average yield of brinjal varies from 20-30 t/ha.
158
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
FRUITS
Aonla
India ranks first in the world in area and production. Aonla being
a sub-tropical crop prefers dry sub-tropical climate. Heavy frost is
not suitable for its cultivation. Slightly acidic to saline/sodic soil
having pH between 6.5 to 9.5 is suitable for cultivation.
Improved Varieties: Kanchan (NA 4), Krishna (NA 5), NA 6, NA
7 and NA 10.
Land is prepared by ploughing, harrowing, levelling, and removing
weeds. Aonla propagated by budding or softwood grafting in July-
August.
Grafted or budded plants are planted 4-5 meter apart under square
system of layout during July-August or February.
Pits of 1-1.25 m. size are dug two months prior to planting. In each
pit 3-4 baskets of FYM and 1 kg. neem cake or 500 g. bonemeal
should be mixed with soil and filled in the pits. In sodic soil, 5-8
kg. Gypsum along with 20 kg. sand is filled in the pit irrigation is
provided immediately after this.
10 kg. Farmyard manure, 100g. N, 50g. P and 100g. K should be
given to one-year-old plants. This dose increased on yearly basis
upto ten years.
Irrigation is provided at an interval of 15-20 days in dry summer.
No irrigation is required rainy and winter season. First irrigation
is provided just after manure & fertilizer application (January/
February) Irrigation is not provided during the flowering period
i.e., mid-March and April.
The plants are trained to modified central leader system. Two to
four branches with wide crotch angle, appearing in the opposite
directions should be encouraged in early years. The unwanted
branches are pinched off during March-April. In the subsequent
years, 4-6 branches should be allowed to develop.
159
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Inter-cropping with vegetables, flowers and a few medicinal/
aromatic plants are well suited for intercropping, cost of inter
cropping would be Rs. 10,000/- per acre. Paddy straw, sugarcane
trash and farmyard manure can be used for mulching.
Necrosis, a physiological disorder has been observed mostly in
case of Banarasi and Francis varieties.
A budded/grafted tree starts bearing third year onwards after
planting, whereas a seeded plant may take 6-8 year. The fruits are
harvested manually and sorted according to their size. Fruits can
be stored for a period of 6-9 days under ordinary conditions. Aonla
tree may bear 1-3 q fruit /tree, giving 15-20 tones yield /ha.
Papaya
Papaya being a tropical fruit grows well in the mild sub-tropical
regions. Night temperature below 12-14 degree C for several hours
during winter season affects its growth and production severely.
Well drained sandy loam soil is ideal for cultivation of papaya.
Varieties are Honey Dew, Coorg Honey Dew, Washington, Pusa
Delicious and Pusa Nanha.
Commercially propagated by seed and tissue culture plants. The
seed rate is 250-300 g/ha. The seeds after being treated with 0.1%
Monosan (phenyl mercuric acetate), ceresan etc.
Light irrigation at morning and nursery beds are covered with
polythene sheets or dry paddy straw. About 15-20 cm tall seedlings
are chosen for planting. Planting during spring (February-March),
monsoon (June-July) and autumn (October- November).
Spacing of 1.8 x 1.8 m. is normally followed. However higher
density cultivation with spacing of 1.5 x 1.5 m. /ha enhances the
returns. Pusha Nanha is adopted for high density planting,6400
plants/ha.
Papaya plant needed heavy doses of manures and fertilizers. Apart
from the basal dose of manures @10 kg /plant applied in the pits,
200-250g. each of N, P O and K O getting high yield. ZnSO (0.5%)
2 5 2 4
160
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
and H2 BO3 (0.1%) are sprayed to increase growth and yield.
The irrigation schedule is fixed based on soil type and weather
conditions of the region and avoid waterlogging.
Deep hoeing is recommended during the first year to check weed
growth. Application of Fluchloralin or Alachlorin or Butachlorine
(2.0 g./ha.) as pre-emergence.
Intercropping shallow rooted leguminous crops after non-
leguminous is beneficial. About 10% of the male plants are kept in
the orchards for good pollination.
The insect/pests mostly observed are fruit flies (Bactrocera
cucurbitae), grosshopper (Poekilocerus pictus), aphids (Aphis
gossypii), red spider mite (Tetranychus cinnabarinus), stem borer
(Dasyses rugosellus) and grey weevil (Myllocerus viridans).
control by Dimethoate (0.3%) or methyl demeton (0.05%).
The main diseases reported are powdery mildew (Oidium caricae),
anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides), damping off and
stem rot. Application of wettable sulphur (1 g/l.) carbendazim/
thiophanate methyl (1 g./l.) and Kavach/ Mancozeb (2 g./l.) are
effective control measures
Full size fruits are harvested when they turn light green in colour
with tinge of yellow at apical end. The economic life of papaya plant
is only 3 to 4 years. The average yield of 75-100 tones /ha.
Fruits are highly perishable in nature. They can be stored for
a period of 1-3 weeks at a temperature of 10- 13oC and 85-90%
relative humidity.
Guava
Guava is grown in both tropical and sub-tropical regions. Heavy
clay to very light sandy soil having pH between 4.5-8.2 and good
quality in river basins but sensitive to waterlogging.
Varieties: L-49, Allahabad Safeda, Lucknow Safeda, Apple Colour,
Chittidar, Red Fleshed, Allahabad Surkha, Sardar, Mirzapuri
Seedless, CISH-G-1, CISH-G-2, CISH-G-3.
161
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Land is prepared during the summer season by ploughing,
harrowing, leveling and removing weeds. Planting is done during
the rainy season June-July is the ideal time for planting at 5-8
m distance according to variety, soil fertility and availability of
irrigation facilities.
Fertilizer 600 g. N, 400 g. K should be applied in the first week
of May for rainy season and July for winter season crop. Drip
irrigation is very beneficial and 60% of the water saved.
Pre-emergence uses of diuron (1.6 kg. /ha), oryzalin (1.67 litres/
ha.) or simazine (1.6 kg/ha) are found effective in control of weeds
in guava orchards.
Dry leaves or straw or black plastic can be used as mulching
material its helps conserving moisture and improving the fruits
quality. Leguminous crops or vegetable can be grown as intercrops
during the first three years.
Growth regulators like NAA, NAD and 2,4D have been found
effective in thinning of flower.
The insect pests mostly observed are fruit fly, stem borer, bark
eating caterpillar, thrips, nematodes, mealy bug, and scale insect.
Spraying the malathion (2ml.), phosphamidon (0.5ml. per ltr. of
water), etc. has been found to be effective in most cases.
The main diseases reported are wilt, fruit canker, fruit rot,
anthrachose and grey leaf spot. Application of Carbendazim/
Thiophanate methyl (1g/l) or Kavach/Mancozeb (2g/l) depending
upon the type of infection for controlling the diseases.
Fruit drop is a serious disorder in guava resulting in about 45-
65% loss due to different physiological and environmental factors.
Spraying of GA for reducing the fruit drop.
Foliar application of 0.5% diammonium phosphate and zinc
sulphate in combination at weekly intervals for two months reduces
the bronzing in guava. Pre-flowering sprays 0.4% boric acid, 0.3%
162
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
zinc sulphate and copper sulphate 0.2-0.4% increase the yield and
fruit size.
Plants start bearing at 2-3 years of age, but they attain full bearing
after 10 years with100 to 150 kg. fruits every year. Harvesting
periods is August for rainy season crop and November- December
for winter season crop. The shelf life can be extended up to 20 days
by keeping them at low temperature of 50 C and 75- 85% relative
humidity.
Spices
Garlic
It can be cultivated on various soil types. It gives best result when
grown in sandy loam and silt loam soils rich in organic matter.
Range of soil pH should be 6 to 7.
Varieties are- Agrifound white, Yamuna Safed (G-1), Yamuna Safed
2(G-50), Yamuna Safed 3 (G 282), Yamuna Safed 4 (G 323)
225-250 kg seed require for one acre. Seed treatment with
Thiram@2 gm/kg of seed + Benomyl 50WP@1 gm/liter water
effectively controls damping off and smut diseases.
The manure and fertilizers requirement are 125 kg N, 65 kg P and
100kg K/ha and 40 tonnes FYM. Borax up to 10 kg/ ha increase
bulb size and yield.
Thrips: If it is not controlled properly, can cause yield loss up to
50%. Mostly observed in dry weather. If infestation observed in
field spray Fipronil@30 ml/15 lt water or Profenophos@10 ml or
Carbosulfan@10 ml+ Mancozeb@25 gm/10 lt water by 8-10 days
interval.
Purple blotch: Severe infestation may cause yield loss up to 70%.
Deep purple lesions are observed on leaves. Yellow streaks get turn
brown and extend along the blade. Spray Propineb70%WP@350
gm/acre/150 lt of water, twice at 10 days interval.
163
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Coriander
Coriander is popular for its aromatic seeds, leaves and stems. All
parts of the plant are indispensable food adjuncts in Indian cookery.
Coriander is a tropical plant and is capable of tolerating heat and
drought. Grain yield and quality are at best when moderately cool
and dry weather prevails during grain formation stage.
It can grow in all types of soil, but well drained loamy soils are
suitable for good growth. Coriander is grown throughout the year
for leaf purpose but for grain, the crop is sown during October-
November. FYM or compost is applied during last ploughing
A seed rate of 10- 15 kg/ha is generally adopted for irrigated
conditions.
Varieties are Pant harithma, V1, V2, GC1, GC2, Sindhu, Swati,
CO-2, CO-3., Azad dhaniya-1.
FYM 25 tonnes/ ha, 60 kg nitrogen, 40 kg phosphorus and 20 kg
potash are recommended.
Aphid: If Infestation of Aphid is observed, to control spray of
Imidacloprid@6ml/10Ltr water or Thiamethoxam@4gm/10Ltr of
water is recommended.
Powdery Mildew is Patchy, White powdery growth appears on
upper surface of leaves and its control spraying water soluble
Sulphur@20gm/10Ltr or Propiconazole10EC (Topas) @200ml/
acre in 200Ltr of water is recommended.
Fenugreek
It can be grown in all type of soil rich in organic content but give
best result when grown in well drained loamy or sandy loam soils.
It can tolerate pH of range 5.3 to 8.2. The crop requires a cool
climate and is capable of tolerating frost or freezing weather. Dry
weather is essential during crop maturity phase.
Last week of October and first week of November is best time for
sowing.
164
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
18-25 Kg seed/ ha. Seeds are soaked in water for 2 days prior
to sowing to enhance germination. Seeds are also treated with
Rhizobium culture.
Varieties are CO-1Fenugreek, Rajendra Kranti, Pusa early
bunching, kasuric selections, Azad methi-1, Hissar Sonali.
Farmyard manure or compost at the rate of 15-25 tonnes/ ha is
applied. The biomass production is high with higher doses of
organic matter. Nitrogen @20 kg/ha, phosphorus 60kg/ha and
potash 40 kg/ ha should be applied. To attain fast growth 15-20
days after germination spray Triacontanol hormone@20ml/10 lt of
water is recommended.
Infestation of Aphid, to control spray Imidacloprid@3ml/10Ltr or
Thiamethoxam@4gm/10Ltr of water.
To protect crop from root rot, as preventive measure soil
application of Neem Cake@60kg/acre. Treat seeds with
Trichoderma viride@4gm/kg of seed. If observed in field to control,
drenched soil with Carbendazim @5gm/Ltr of water or Copper
oxychloride@2gm/litre of water.
Powdery Mildew is Patchy, White powdery growth appears on
upper surface of leaves and its control spraying water soluble
Sulphur@20gm/10Ltr or Propiconazole10EC (Topas) @200ml/
acre in 200Ltr of water is recommended.
Fennel
Fennel also known as Saunf. Its seeds after drying are used for spice
purpose. Fennel is good source of fibre, vitamin C, potassium. It
is used for flavouring meat dishes, soups etc. Its leaves are used
for garnishing dishes also in salads. Fennel also has medicinal
properties. It is used for digestion, also to treat constipation,
diarrhea, throat pain, headache etc.
All soils rich in organic matter are suitable for cultivation but best
result in well drained sandy loam to loamy soils. PH of soil should
be in range of 6.5 to 8. Sowing in second fortnight of October. To
165
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
obtain good yield avoid delay in sowing.
4 kg seed require for one-acre land.
Varieties are RF-35, RF-101, Gujrat Fennel-1, Azad sounf-1.
Apply well decomposed FYM @10-12qtl/acre in soil at time of land
preparation. Apply Nitrogen@20kg/acre in form of Urea@45kg/
acre in two to three equal splits. First nitrogen application is as
basal dose, apply remaining dose of Nitrogen 30 and 60 days after
sowing.
Aphid: If infestation of Aphid is observed, to controlled spray
Dimethoate 30EC@2ml per litre of water or Methyl demeton
25EC@2ml per litre of water.
Powdery Mildew: If infestation is observed, spray wettable
Sulphur@2gm/ltr of water.
Value addition of vegetables and fruits for nutritional security
and income generation
Food has been considered as the major factor in maintaining
well-being and health of individuals. Active ingredients in food,
which are effective in promoting human health, include amino
acids, fats dietary fiber, antioxidants, pigments, vitamins, and
minerals which are present in different food groups such as
pulses, cereals, legumes, oilseeds, fruits, and vegetables. Among
all these food groups, fruits and vegetables play a significant role
in human nutrition, especially as a source of vitamins, minerals
and dietary fiber. The different fruits and vegetables like carrots,
tomatoes potatoes, ginger, green leafy vegetables, and the like are
important protective foods, because of their nutritional value and
antioxidant properties. Value addition of such fruits and vegetables
by formulation of different value-added products are an important
source of nutritional security.
166
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Tomato
Tomatoes are one of the most popular protective foods, because
of its lycopene content, outstanding nutritive value, antioxidant
properties and a powerhouse of medicinal properties. It is a rich
source of minerals like calcium, magnesium, phosphorous, iron,
sodium, potassium, and vitamins especially A and C. Tomatoes are
consumed mainly as a raw staple food, as an ingredient in different
types of food products and in the form of processed products such
as powder, tomato juice, paste, puree, sauce, etc.
This horticultural crop is an excellent source of health promoting
compounds, being a balanced mixture of minerals and antioxidant
vitamins including vitamin C and E, as well as rich in lycopene,
beta carotene, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin, lutein, and flavonoids
such as quercetin. The main antioxidants in the tomatoes are the
carotenoids specially lycopene which have the highest lycopene
levels among fruits and vegetables, ascorbic acid, and phenolic
compounds. Among the different carotenoids, lycopene, is the most
abundant in human serum, with important antioxidant activity
involved in prevention of several types of cancer and degenerative
diseases such as cardiovascular diseases.
Due to lack of proper processing, storage and transportation
facilities, enormous quantities of tomatoes are lost during, hence
proper processing and storage in some preserved form during
seasons of glut will ensure its availability and utilization during
deficiency period.
Hence, processing of tomatoes in different forms as preferred by
the consumers, Processing of fresh tomatoes can be done to prepare
value added products like tomato pulp, tomato puree, tomato paste,
tomato flakes, canned tomatoes, tomato ketchup, tomato soup and
sauce, tomato powder and dehydrated tomato.
Therefore, replacement of fresh tomatoes for example, with tomato
powder can facilitate the processing sector with daily cuisines and
167
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
preparation during off season. Tomato powder can be used in
processed products, such as soup mixes and confectionary items.
Carrots
It is well known for its nutrient contents viz., carotene and
carotenoids, besides appreciable amount of vitamins and
minerals such as ascorbic acid, tocopherol etc. Among roots and
other vegetables, carrot is the best source of carotene, which is
a precursor of vitamin A, an essential nutrient for maintaining
health. Carrot possesses nutraceutical properties such as anti-
mutagenic, chemo preventive, photo protective and immune
enhancing aspects. The presence of high concentration of
antioxidant carotenoids, especially beta-carotene, may account for
the biological and medicinal properties of carrots. Carrot is also
rich in fiber content and has been reported to be effective for its
multifaceted applications, which have resulted in development of
various processing operation for making different products.
Carrots have been reported to be effective in the elimination of uric
acid. Carrots not only prevent vitamin A deficiency, but also cancer
and other diet related human diseases. It has greater cytotoxic
effect against cancer cells and reduces the enzymes that promote
conversion of pre-carcinogens to carcinogens. It may also enhance
the immune system protect against stroke, high blood pressure,
osteoporosis, cataract, arthritis, heart disease and urinary tract
infections.
Processing of carrots would ensure its availability round year and
reduction in cost of transportation and storage. During winter
season, when carrots are available in plenty, different processed
products may be prepared and stored in airtight containers, which
may be incorporated in various recipes.
Different processed products of carrots are carrot juice, carrot
powder, carrot flakes, canned carrot, carrot candy, carrot halwa,
carrot grits, carrot soup, carrot Dalia and fabricated baby foods.
168
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Carrot powder prepared by dehydrating carrots is often
incorporated in traditional food products to enhance the
nutritional value, and thereby produce value added products such
as paratha, porridge and laddu. These processed carrot products
are not only nutritionally adequate, but also qualitatively sound for
an extended period.
Ginger
Ginger is one of the five most important spices of India, standing
next to chilli, garlic, and turmeric. Ginger is an underground
stem of the zingiberous herbaceous plant. Ginger rhizomes are
available for harvesting every 7-9 months after planting and stages
of maturity of the rhizome have a significant influence in its quality
and processing.
Ginger is commonly used as a food additive, and as spice, it is
used in food preparation to impart its characteristic flavour. It has
been attributed with antioxidant properties, proteolytic activity,
and tenderizing effect. It has been attributed with antioxidant
properties which widens its use in preservation of meat and meat
products.
Ginger has been used to treat numerous types of nausea and
vomiting. Ginger’s therapeutic properties effectively stimulate
circulation of the blood, remove toxins form the body, clean the
bowels and kidneys, and nourish skin. Other uses for ginger
root include the treatment of asthma, bronchitis, and other
respiratory problems. Besides therapeutic properties, ginger has
been attributed with antioxidant properties, proteolytic activity,
and tenderizing effect. Ginger is used in various food preparations
to impart its characteristic flavour and is probably the only spice
being used in production of beverages like ginger beer, ginger ale
and ginger wine.
Although ginger production is very high, but due to lack of
proper storage and transportation facilities, about 20 percent of
fresh ginger crop gets damaged due to respiration and microbial
169
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
spoilage. Hence, it becomes necessary to process the surplus ginger
in different preserved forms, which is available throughout the year.
The different processed products from ginger include likes Paste,
Candy, Preserve, Pickle, Chocolates, Beverages, Powder, Juice, Ice
cream, Oleoresin etc.
Fenugreek Leaves
Fenugreek is a popular green leafy vegetable available in plenty, at
lower cost during winter season. Blanching treatment is used to
preserve the colour and nutritional value of GLVs. Fenugreek leaf
powder obtained by dehydrating fenugreek leaves has been used to
prepare paratha and saag.
Potato
Potato is a versatile food, which can be eaten as a staple food, as a
complementary vegetable, as a snack item or processed into several
forms, and in any of these roles, it enhances the nutritional quality
of the diets of people. Potatoes are versatile as they can be consumed
in various forms as boiled, fried, baked, roasted, steamed and even
in several pressed forms such as French fries, chips, papad, flakes,
dice, cubes, granules, flour, canned potatoes etc.
Potatoes contribute significantly to the nutritive value of a meal, as
it is not only a rich source of energy, but contain good quality edible
grade protein, dietary fiber, several minerals and trace elements,
essential vitamins and little or negligible fat.
It is seasonal and the crop produced has a shorter storage life.
Hence, under such circumstances, the post-harvest processing of
the bulky, perishable potatoes into dehydrated potato products
helps to extend the storage life and a serve to increase the supply in
off-seasons in different forms, in a price effective manner.
Different processed products of potatoes such as potato flour,
potato grits, potato flakes, potato granules and potato cubes.
170
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Sweet Potato
Sweet potato, a commonly grown root vegetable of winter season is
valued for its high nutritive value, flavours, and digestibility. Sweet
potato is widely used is India, for food consumption after boiling,
baking, or frying. However, in other countries, flour of the sweet
potato is often used in biscuits, cakes, and pudding.
The advantage of sweet potato over other vegetables is that it has
got the shorter growth period, and adverse weather conditions
rarely cause a complete crop loss. Sweet potatoes often referred
to as “poor people’s food” or “poor men’s crop” has difficulties
in marketing and processing. Processing of sweet potato tuber
increases their availability and reduces post-harvest wastage. The
processed products of sweet potato are sweet potato flour, sweet
potato granules and canned sweet potatoes.
Sweet potato flour can be incorporated in wheat flour for bread
and biscuit baking, hot cakes, gruel, noodles, candy, puddings, and
other preparations. It can be mixed with wheat flour for making
chapatti and bread. This flour functions as a stabilizing agent in ice-
creams. Sweet potatoes are an important source of dietary protein,
substantial quantity of vitamins (Beta carotene, B complex and
vitamin C) minerals, trace elements and high energy value.
171
ICAR RABI AgRo-AdvIsoRy foR fARmeRs
Zone-Iv
BIHAR
Field Crops
Cereals
Wheat
Timely sowing of wheat crop ensures good crop stand, yield and
escape terminal heat stress at the time of maturity. Right time for
field preparation and sowing of wheat is 1st week of Nov using
zero tillage and late sowing by 20th December. In late sown wheat,
increase the seed rate by 10-20%.
If sufficient moisture is not available apply light irrigation and
complete sowing.
Sowing of timely sown wheat varieties DBW 187, HD 2967, K1317,
HD 3226, DBW 39, K0307, HD 2824, HD 2402, CBW 38, PBW
343, Sabour Samridhi.
Delayed sowing of wheat due to late harvesting paddy, of wheat
varieties HD 3118, HD 2985, HI 1563, DBW 107, DBW 14, HD
2643, HP 1633, HD 2307, DBW 173, PBW 752, HUW 234, PBW
373, Sabour Shrestha.
Recommended varieties under dry areas are- HD 3171, HD 2888,
K 8027, C 306, MACS 6145, Sabour Nirjal, HDR 77, K 9465.
Under normal sown crop maintain the row spacing of 20cm and in
delayed sown condition 18 cm between two rows.
Apply 150-120 kg N, 60 kg P O and 40 kg K O per hectare for
2 5 2
optimum productivity. The N is to be applied in two split doses of
60 kg as basal and the remaining 60-70 kg at first irrigation and full
dose phosphorus and potash as basal.
172